
GE HealthCare, a global medical technology and pharmaceutical diagnostics company, did not disclose the financial details of the transaction, which was announced on Monday, Jan. 8. The company plans to fund the transaction with cash on hand.
Jan Makela, president and CEO of imaging at GE HealthCare, said discussions between the companies occurred over many months, and that GE HealthCare felt MIM Software fit well with the company's strategy.
"Most cancer patients at some point will go to radiation oncology, which is where they get external beam therapy to hit the cancer," Makela said in an interview with Crain's. "This is a huge industry. We sell hardware into that space. And we noticed that MIM was quite active and successful at working with customers on the software side."
MIM's portfolio of imaging solutions includes integrating diagnostic images from multiple modalities into treatment plans; automating to reduce repetitive tasks and manual interventions and advanced processes in diagnostic imaging and nuclear medicine to determine therapy response. It also includes a platform that assists with Theranostics imaging and dosimetry.
GE HealthCare plans to integrate these solutions into "its advanced visualization offerings to facilitate AI-based segmentation and contouring as well as dosimetry analysis for patients across their treatment journeys and in the growing fields of radiology, molecular imaging and radiation oncology," the company says.
MIM Software, founded in 2003, has additional offices in China and Belgium.
"We are excited by the prospect of joining GE HealthCare and thrilled to share this exciting news," MIM Software CEO Andrew Nelson said in the deal announcements. "Over the past two decades, we have worked to develop innovative vendor-agnostic products and deliver quality services to earn the trust of our customers - this will not change. As a part of GE HealthCare, we anticipate developing new and increasingly integrated digital solutions to meet our customers' most complex and pressing needs, today and into the future. Together, we will build upon our shared legacies of enhancing patient care."
GE HealthCare is a $18.3 billion business with more than 50,000 employees, according to the company. It spun out from General Electric in 2023 and trades on Nasdaq under "GEHC." It previously acquired Caption Health, Inc., an AI health care company, and IMACTIS, a France-based company in the field of computed tomography interventional guidance.
"We are committed to providing comprehensive, connected devices and digital solutions that enable providers to improve patient care across multiple specialties," said Peter Arduini, president and CEO at GE HealthCare, in a statement. "We expect our efforts to bring these two complementary organizations and innovative product portfolios together to strengthen our capabilities as a leading provider of integrated imaging systems, analytics, and advanced digital workflows across several care areas and pathways - including Theranostics, radiation oncology, urology, neurology and cardiology. Now and in the future, we are working to transform patient care."


