
Party affiliation: Democrat
Educational background: Bachelor's in mechanical engineering, University of Missouri-Columbia
Occupation: U.S. senator
Political experience: Albuquerque city councilor, U.S. congressman, U.S. senator
Relevant life experience: I grew up in a working-class union household. My parents taught me the value of hard work and giving back to the community. From the Albuquerque City Council to the U.S. House and U.S. Senate, I've worked to deliver results for New Mexicans.
Have you ever been charged or convicted of a crime, including drunken driving?: No
Have you ever filed for bankruptcy or been involved in a bankruptcy proceeding, either personally or in business?: No
Have you ever been the subject of liens for unpaid taxes? No
What separates you from your opponent?
I am the son of an immigrant lineman and factory worker, and have dedicated my career to serving others; creating economic opportunities, lowering costs for working families, and protecting our rights and freedoms, including reproductive rights. My opponent is a wealthy former hedge fund executive with a history of prioritizing profits over people, including outsourcing American jobs. While I've fought to deliver results and investments for New Mexico, she's spent decades enriching herself on the East Coast, only to return 50 years later and run for office backed by extreme politicians who want to ban abortion nationwide.
Do you support legislation that would make it a right nationwide for women to access in vitro fertilization and other fertility treatments? Why or why not?
I fully support protecting access to in vitro fertilization and other fertility treatments, and have advocated for making it a nationwide right by co-sponsoring the Access to Family Building Act, which would ensure every American's right to IVF. Unfortunately, Republicans blocked this bill twice this year. Just as I support a national right to access abortion, which my opponent does not, I believe every family deserves the freedom to pursue parenthood on their own terms, without government interference. Access to reproductive health services is essential, and we must remove barriers and ensure they are available to all New Mexicans.
Do you support a path to citizenship for young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children, frequently referred to as Dreamers? Why or why not?
I strongly support a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers, and have repeatedly called on Republicans in Congress to pass the Dream Act without delay. These young people have grown up here, contributed to our communities, and share the same hopes and dreams as all Americans. They deserve the opportunity to fully participate in the country they call home. I've consistently supported comprehensive immigration reform; including legislation to provide Dreamers a swift path to full citizenship, expand fair and legal immigration pathways, and invest in our border communities at the scale needed.
Do you support laws that require all voters to produce an official photo ID in order to vote? Why or why not?
While we must protect the integrity of our elections, restrictive voter ID laws disproportionately impact low-income communities, seniors and people of color, making it harder for them to vote. New Mexico's elections are already secure and legitimate without such unnecessary laws, as we've consistently maintained fair and transparent election processes. We should be making it easier, not harder, for every eligible New Mexican to participate in our democracy through secure, accessible voting options for all.
What do you believe the role of the U.S. should be in achieving peace in the Middle East and do you support boycotts or divestment targeting Israel?
I support a cease-fire and the safe, immediate release of all hostages. Until that is achieved, the U.S. should work diplomatically to protect civilians in Israel, Gaza, and the West Bank, provide humanitarian aid, encourage de-escalation, and work towards a lasting two-state solution that ensures peace, security and stability for both Israelis and Palestinians.
Nella Domenici
Age: 63
Party affiliation: Republican
Educational background: BA, English literature, Georgetown University, 1982; JD, Georgetown University Center, Law Night School, 1987; MBA Harvard Business School, high distinction, George F. Baker Scholar (top 5%) 1993
Occupation: Business executive and philanthropist
Political experience: Republican candidate for U.S. Senate. Often participated in campaign events with my father, U.S. Sen. Pete V. Domenici.
Relevant life experience: Began career at the bottom and reached the top in the complex world of finance - mastering budgets, markets and interest rates. Advised/invested in companies to create thousands of American jobs in health care, AI, mortgage lending, commercial real estate.
Have you ever been charged or convicted of a crime, including drunken driving?: No
Have you ever filed for bankruptcy or been involved in a bankruptcy proceeding, either personally or in business?: No
Have you ever been the subject of liens for unpaid taxes? Yes
If yes, please explain: There were three liens in the last 25 years. To the best of my knowledge these relatively small liens totaled approximately $7,000 and were paid as soon as I was made aware of them.
What separates you from your opponent?
Third-generation New Mexican born into a New Mexico family with an unsurpassed public service record. Heinrich was not, and has none.
My approach: Common sense, bipartisan, moderate problem solving. Opponent votes almost 100% with the extreme, leftist wing of his party, often contrary to New Mexicans' needs.
My priorities: fighting crime, securing the border, improving cost of living, health care and education while creating jobs. Heinrich's obsession: extreme radical climate measures.
With bipartisan leaders co-founded Excellent Schools New Mexico; 13 public charter schools in underserved areas; 9,000 students outperform other schools.
Heinrich's record? 20 years of state's decline.
Do you support legislation that would make it a right nationwide for women to access in vitro fertilization and other fertility treatments? Why or why not?
Yes.
No disappointment greater than learning that a woman is not able to have a baby. IVF provides hope and options for women and families who would otherwise be unable have a child.
Heinrich has been dishonest and lied about my position on abortion. I oppose a national abortion ban. Abortion should be safe, legal and rare. I trust, respect and want to empower women. My focus is reducing unwanted pregnancies because approximately one in three unwanted pregnancies results in abortion. We need better education about and access to birth control for all women.
Senators should be honest.
Do you support a path to citizenship for young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children, frequently referred to as Dreamers? Why or why not?
Biden/Harris/Heinrich have created a border crisis, a humanitarian crisis, a crime crisis, drug crisis and a national security threat with their open border policies.
Congress must first pass legislation that secures the border and then pass immigration reform. Other border states have built barriers; we need to finish building our barriers along our border.
We must install state-of-the-art screening technology for 100% of vehicles passing through our border; Reinstate "Stay in Mexico"; tighten asylum process; end catch and release; bolster funding for Border Patrol; support comprehensive, bipartisan and fair immigration reform; deport criminals and terrorists; enact temporary worker program.
Do you support laws that require all voters to produce an official photo ID in order to vote? Why or why not?
Everyone should want elections laws that allow every citizen who is eligible to vote to exercise their right.
Under the U.S. Constitution the responsibility for establishing election laws is vested in the state legislatures. I defer to the New Mexico Legislature, but hope they share my view that it is important to enact laws that build confidence that only eligible citizens are voting, that our ballots are secure and accurately counted. As a U.S. senator I have no role in that decision.
What do you believe the role of the U.S. should be in achieving peace in the Middle East and do you support boycotts or divestment targeting Israel?
Israel, our closest Middle East ally, was brutally attacked by a terrorist organization wanting to destroy them, and bring death to Americans. I support Israel's right to self-defense.
Israel should decide the terms and timing for a cease-fire when the hostages are freed and their war objectives have been achieved. I believe in peace through strength and appeasing terrorists will not bring about peace.
Humanitarian aid should be provided.
Foreign policy is the responsibility of the president and the Congress. I do not support boycotts or divestments targeting Israel.
Heinrich is among the least supportive of our ally, Israel.


