Health has been recognized as one of the nation's 15 Top Health Systems according to an independent quality analysis based on a scorecard provided by PINC AI, the technology and services brand of Premier, Inc. (NASDAQ: PINC), and reported by Fortune. By category, the Lexington-based system is recognized in the top five medium-sized health systems in the nation; due to a tie, there are six systems in this category.
To create the list, PINC AI conducted an objective, quantitative analysis of publicly available data to identify the top health systems in the U.S. The primary purpose of the PINC AI 15 Top Health Systems study is to inspire hospital and health system leaders to pursue higher performance and deliver added value to their patients and communities. The quantitative study is based on a balanced scorecard which consists of a variety of measurements distributed across four pillars: clinical, financial, operational and patient experience.
"This recognition among the nation's 15 Top Health Systems, and among the six best medium-sized systems in the country, is a testament to our unwavering commitment to excellence in providing health care services," said Anthony Houston, Ed.D., FACHE, market president, CHI Saint Joseph Health. "This honor is a reflection of the dedication to excellence and humankindness of our exceptional caregivers across Kentucky. Each and every day, they are fulfilling our mission, living our values and achieving excellence. We are honored to be recognized as one of the top six medium-sized health systems in the country as part of the nation's PINC AI 15 Top Health Systems."
15 Top Health Systems program performance
This year, based on comparisons between the study winners and a peer group of similar health systems, the analysis found that the winners of the 15 Top Health Systems program delivered better outcomes while operating more efficiently and at a lower cost. Compared to non-winning health systems, this year's winners had:
21 percent fewer deaths.
5 percent fewer patients with complications.
21 percent fewer health care-associated infections (HAIs).
0.5-day shorter average length of stay.
Better reported patient experience scores, with a top-box Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) score of 74 percent versus 69.6 percent for non-winning hospitals.
"Health system leaders are continuously focused on quality, excellence and patient-centered care," said Leigh Anderson, Premier's chief operating officer and the leader of PINC AI. "A selection as one of the 15 Top Health Systems is a great honor and demonstrates the importance of health system leadership and proven strategies for improvement. As one of the 15 Top Health Systems, CHI Saint Joseph Health has achieved high-quality health care and the implementation of key strategies that have directly led to significantly improved patient outcomes, with fewer readmissions and complications."
___ (c)2024 The Sentinel Echo (London, Ky.) Visit The Sentinel Echo (London, Ky.) at www.sentinel-echo.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


