AI in health care movement as companies say they struggle to find skilled workers - but don't spend money to provide training to meet their needs.
The disconnect was highlighted in the 16th annual State of St. Louis Workforce Report, released Thursday, that also heralded the largest workforce - 1,495,200 people - the St. Louis area has ever seen.
"This workforce puts us in the top 10 cities in the nation for growth," said Phyllis Ellison, associate vice chancellor of St. Louis Community College's Workforce Solutions Group. "It's nice to be in the top 10 for growth, for a change."
Despite having the largest workforce in the region's history to pull from, the 600 companies surveyed for the report listed several barriers to recruiting new talent.
Top on the list is a shortage of workers with industry-relevant knowledge or skills. Some 74% of surveyed companies said their applicant pool lacks experience in patient care, followed by shortages in skilled trades (54%) and manufacturing and maintenance (41%).
The report sheds light on where this problem may come from: 24% of surveyed companies reported spending no money on employee training in the past year. And 42% spent $500 or less.
"If that 24% and 42% is really representative of our region, I'm concerned," said Ellison.
She said over 60% of workers, nationally, live paycheck to paycheck; 30% of workers have less than $1,000 in savings.
"They can't afford to step away from their jobs, get more training, then find their next job," Ellison said. "It's a disconnect that needs to be addressed."
The training in question isn't a four-year college degree. Report results indicate that across sectors, "middle-skill" workers are the most desired group, with 53% of firms seeking employees with more than a high school diploma but less than a four-year degree.
In 2023, the number of employers with middle-skill positions available was 40%. This year, it was 49%.
St. Louis Community College is working to address these needs, in part with six new buildings being constructed across STLCC campuses, said Jeff Pittman, the college system's chancellor.
"All of these buildings are related to workforce sectors," he said. Three will be dedicated to addressing needs of health care employers, the highest employer category in the St. Louis area.
Currently, working in health care is a challenge, and it has been since the start of the pandemic. AI could help, experts said.
"Doctors are just not okay," said Dr. Danish Nagda, founder of Rezilient Health, in a panel discussion Thursday for the report release. Between a high volume of patients and short turn-around times between patients, many doctors and nurses across the country are experiencing burnout, he said.
Artificial intelligence may help alleviate challenges associated with complex, multi-variable tasks in health care - the ones that most often start to slip when providers experience burnout, said Dr. Philip R. O. Payne, associate dean for health information and data science at Washington University.
Examples include predicting patient outcomes for highly complex diseases, or double-checking that patients' prescription medications won't react with one another.
St. Louis has several large hospital systems, and a business environment that fosters startup development. It's home to 5,653 new startups this year alone.
Payne said St. Louis is "the ideal testbed for the AI revolution," as the region has university researchers and entrepreneurs to develop AI tools, large patient datasets to train and test them on, and the workforce to deploy them once they are ready for use.
Payne added, however, that AI is only as good as the way its trained, and the people that use it. It is not about replacing people.
"It's about enhancing what people can do," he said.
Some hospitals in the region are already taking advantage of AI to avoid nurse and doctor burnout, said Jill Williams, vice president of workforce development at the Missouri Hospital Association.
"We want to try to bring back the joy of working at bedsides, and take away the administrative burden, and I think we can do that with AI," she said.
Serina DeSalvio - 314-340-8091sdesalvio@post-dispatch.com


