
David Hamilton, Michigan Medicine cardiology fellow, was part of the research team that created the risk prediction algorithm. According to Hamilton, the model helps combine a variety of factors to create the predicted outcome.
"(The tool) took into account ... who (the patients) were, what they looked like, their blood pressure, what medicines they were on, what kind of diseases they had before they got their stents placed, and then was able to use that machine learning algorithm to take all of that information together," Hamilton said.
PCI is a common procedure but has its risks, such as infection, stroke and bleeding. Hamilton said by using AI technology to analyze data on patient medical histories, blood type and other risk factors, doctors could predict how patients will respond once they leave the hospital.
"Using additional databases and collecting information on what happens to these patients after they leave the hospital is really important," Hamilton. "Coronary artery disease doesn't stop when you leave the hospital."
Hamilton said the tool was an easy application for doctors and patients to use, allowing them to weigh the risks of the procedure and make decisions about their care.
"It gets back to the heart of it all - why we do what we do - and that's to help patients," Hamilton said. "Coming up with these research tools so that they can also help patients is really important."
Hitinder Gurm, Michigan Medicine interventional cardiologist, worked alongside Hamilton in creating the algorithm. Gurm leads the BMC2 collaborative, which is a group of healthcare providers dedicated to improving the care of cardiovascular patients.
"In (BMC2), physicians from different hospitals look at data together, identify opportunities and share best practices (to determine) how we can elevate the quality of care that's provided," Gurm said.
Gurm voiced the importance of being able to understand the risks and outcomes of the procedure as well as whether or not another procedure would be needed before going through with the initial PCI. He said that the accuracy of the AI model poses the opportunity for continuing to advance technology to assist in medicine as a whole.
"(The AI model) is way better than every model that I've known in the field," Gurm said. "The predictions are just unbelievably good. ... Our hope is that researchers and clinicians will test it and then define how it best shapes the treatment for the patient."
Medical School student Karan Desai is a member of the organization AI in Medicine. AIM focuses on exploring the functions of AI within medicine and how it is being implemented in the health care profession.
"AI in medicine presents a lot of ethical and moral questions," Desai said. "In this case (of PCI), it's a matter of ... weighing those risks and benefits."
Desai said while there is still work to be done with using AI in health care, it opens a new window of possibilities for doctors.
"I think will definitely be positive," Desai said. "It's just a matter of regulating it. There's going to be some trial and error. ... We do for sure know it's going to be a net positive or net good over having (only) human judgment."
Daily Staff Reporter Gillian Reynolds can be reached at gillyr@umich.edu


