
He initially thought hed like to be a surgeon because of the ability to perform a procedure that could help someone almost immediately. So, when he learned about balloon angioplasties and their use in unblocking peoples heart arteries, providing immediate relief for chest pain symptoms, he was intrigued.
Witnessing the implementation of new technology during cardiology training at the University of Florida furthered his desire to take part in cardiac research. Innovation doesnt just make things more efficient for physicians  it also benefits patients.
In an underserved population like Mississippi, making cutting-edge technology available to needy patients is absolutely amazing, Bertolet said.
NMMC recently implemented a handful of new heart health procedures to simplify the diagnosis and treatment of patients in Northeast Mississippi.
An AI-powered stabilizer
A beating heart is a moving heart, Bertolet said, which can complicate certain procedures.
NMMC is the first hospital in the United States to use an artificial intelligence-powered Dynamic Device Stabilizer technology produced by Canon. It can stabilize an image on-screen in the cardiac catheterization lab even as it moves. The only other place its currently being used is Tokyo, Japan, according to Bertolet.
So if were trying to precisely place another stent, or a balloon within a stent, its held completely still on the screen so that we can place whatever device we need to exactly where we need to place it and then deploy it with confidence, he said.
Greater precision leads to better outcomes for patients.
It is designed to enhance the ability of the doctor to deliver the exact, necessary care and to lessen the complications that may occur, Bertolet said.
For patients who may worry about the use of AI in health care, Bertolet said it is simply used to facilitate a doctors knowledge.
The AI is not making a final decision, Bertolet said. They dont make a final diagnosis; they dont do the procedure at all. But what were using it for is to enhance the delivery of information to the doctor so the doctor then can perform a procedure better or to make a diagnosis with more certainty, and then that way the patient gets exactly what they need.
True high-definition imaging
NMMC is one of the first hospitals to use true high-definition imaging to diagnose and treat cardiovascular patients.
When were talking about stents that we put in, their (thickness is) measured in microns, Bertolet said. So, how do you see that inside somebodys body?
Thats where HD imaging, which has been in use for about a year-and-a-half at NMMC, comes in.
Traditionally, if an image is captured and magnified, it loses quality as the image is gets larger. But true HD imaging allows captured images to maintain their sharpness as theyre magnified to an extent that doctors can not only see the stent theyre placing, they can even see individual pieces of metal within the stent.
This allows physicians to see whether a stent has fractured, whether theres an area between two stents that needs to be connected or a range of other tiny yet important details.
HD imaging technology can literally be used from head to toe, Bertolet said.
For example, if a doctor is retrieving a clot in a persons brain, precision is of the utmost importance. Likewise, working in tiny blood vessels of the foot, doctors need to see clearly where theyre working.
I think this high definition is going to allow the physician, wherever they are working, to see their tools, as well as the anatomy, with enhanced precision, Bertolet said.
Aquapheresis  a kind of dialysis for the heart
Congestive heart failure if a growing medical problem, one that is on the rise as people live longer because of advances in medical care that prevent other causes of death.
There are a range of ways to treat congestive heart failure, Bertolet said, but sometimes too much fluid builds up in a patients body, causing their body to swell and making it difficult to breathe.
In essence, its like a freshwater drowning, Bertolet said. They get fluid that builds up in their lungs.
When diuretic therapies cannot expel the fluid, aquapheresis, which functions as a sort of dialysis for the heart, is an option.
Though the process has been around for more than a decade, advancements have made its use safer in recent years.
During aquapheresis treatment, a catheter is placed in a persons arm or shoulder. The machine takes around two tablespoons of blood out of the body at once and runs it through a filter that removes excess water and returns blood to the patients body, acting as an artificial kidney.
We can remove more fluid quickly using the aquapheresis than we could with a medical therapy in a lot of these sicker patients, Bertolet said. So what that means for the patient is they feel better faster, theyre able to be discharged from the hospital sooner and the biggest importance is theyre less likely to come back.
Traditionally, patients with congestive heart failure have to be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days, but because aquapheresis more effectively removes fluid, the patient stays out of the hospital for longer.
That translates into an increased quality of life for the patient, it does translate into less cost for the health system as a whole, but importantly, it also looks like that translates into a longer life for the patient, Bertolet said. Every time a patient gets admitted into the hospital for a heart failure, their long-term risk of dying goes up. They never get back to baseline. So, if we can prevent that admission to the hospital, we will keep them alive longer.
___ (c)2024 the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) Visit the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) at www.djournal.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


