
It is also being deployed by health care systems as a tool to aid in analyzing results generated by scans.
We work with peoples lives, so we do trials of a number of AI systems to find what works best for us, says Dr. Heidi Beilis, vice president and chief medical officer of WellSpan Healths diagnostic service line. We want to use the technology responsibly.
In fact, she says, WellSpan is one of 20 health systems that have pledged to use AI responsibly.
I think were in the very early stages of using AI in health care, and radiology is on the cutting edge of using this technology, says Dr. Timothy Mosher, Penn State Health physician lead for radiology.
READ: Full coverage of Progress 2024 [roundup]
Beilis says AI is not emerging technology. Its here and its not new to us; its integrated into patient care.
WellSpan uses the Aidoc system, launched in February 2022, to flag patient CT scan results for abnormalities that might otherwise not be noticed by the human eye and prioritize these urgent findings for radiologists to review.
Last year, 152,000 cases were analyzed relating to pulmonary artery embolism assessment, cervical-spine fracture and intracranial hemorrhage, Beilis says, and 7,780 were flagged.
It takes radiology to the next level, she says.
WellSpan is dipping our toe in the water with using AI in conjunction with digital mammograms, she says, explaining that if AI flags an area for further study, the algorithm retrieves previous mammograms, compares them to determine if its a real issue and prioritizes a scan that may have a real issue.
The goal is to expedite patient care, Beilis says. AI can flag areas and pull up previous imaging quickly. If theres an issue that requires a closer look, wed like to have that information before the patient leaves the facility.
This new use of AI is being rolled out gradually, she says. So far, its being used in 110 practices throughout WellSpans system.
Theres also a trial project this year using AI in conjunction with lung imaging.
Dr. Beilis says various technologies are merging in WellSpans Gene Health project. According to information provided by WellSpan, the research project is a partnership with Helix, and it helps identify and study how genetic factors may influence a persons health while also supporting new research discoveries across the community.
We want to take care of the whole patient, she says. But people also need to be engaged in their care by getting routine exams and/or scans.
A silent partner
Mosher says Penn State Health is doing a fair amount of research about AI tools.
We look at various AI packages, and before we roll out AI technology in any type of imaging, we look at the quality of the images and the issues flagged by AI, he says. AI has continuously gotten better and has become more accurate, but its a tool and we have to develop the structure to deploy it properly. AI and the radiologist work together  its a silent partner for the radiologist; it flags areas where the radiologist should take a closer look. What used to be a very manual process has been enhanced.
The oldest use of AI for imaging at Penn State Health is in relation to mammograms  the AI algorithms review images after theyre taken. More recently, Penn State Health has deployed AI in other imaging areas, including chest X-rays to detect lung cancer. Another area being considered for AI is heart imaging.
Chest X-rays isnt as far along as mammography because there are a lot of variables that could point to possible lung cancer, Mosher says. One of the things AI is good at is spotting the difference between two sets of scans. Its a bit more complicated when there are more variables involved.
READ: App fine-tuned at Lancaster innovation lab uses AI to spot skin cancer
Saving time
Dr. Danielle Brewington Cross, stroke medical director for Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health, says the health care system began using AI technology about five years ago and currently uses an AI brand called Rapid for CT scans in its stroke program.
The software analyzes the imaging and creates a report within minutes that can be used in clinical situations to help the physician determine the patients treatment plan, Cross says. The main benefit of using AI with CAT scans occurs in stroke patients with a large vessel occlusion (LVO) in need of a thrombectomy. The AI software can identify a LVO and show the affected territory, allowing the multidisciplinary team to start from the same baseline when deciding to move forward. While the team has access to the raw images in the Epic digital system, those images can take time to be visible. A perk of the AI software is that it also gives the team faster access to the patients scans/images.
Cross says Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health is exploring mammography systems that would improve breast cancer screening. Penn Medicine researchers have developed an AI tool/imaging technique thats still being tested that provides highly detailed views of cells and how patients genes operate, allowing doctors and researchers to see cancer cells that may have been virtually invisible.
Proceeding with care
Chris Carmody, senior vice president of the UPMC information technology division, says AI is currently used in the ophthalmology department to evaluate images of the retina to look for signs of macular degeneration.
For patients with acute stroke symptoms, UPMC uses AI to review CT scans and flag areas for a radiologist to examine closer.
Moving forward, AI will be used in other areas, he says.
Were on this journey, and were diligent in our testing and evaluation of this technology, Carmody says. We want to be sure it meets the high standards were looking for. In evaluating the various AI imaging packages, were also concerned with the cybersecurity of our patients data. We continually evolve our practices to protect our patients data.


