

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
                  Mercy looks to AI to relieve burden on health care workers, answer patients' questions




Mercy looks to AI to relieve burden on health care workers, answer patients'
                                 questions
                                                  St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
                                                        October 1, 2023 Sunday
                                                             FIRST EDITION



Copyright 2023 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: ; Pg. C1
Length: 980 words
Byline: By Annika Merrilees St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Body


CHESTERFIELD - The Mercy health system plans to roll out a series of artificial intelligence-based tools in the
coming months, in partnership with Microsoft.

Their efforts are still in the early stages, but if they succeed, officials believe the technology could help patients
navigate the health care system, reduce burden on medical staff and monitor for errors.

They aim to get a few programs up and running sometime next year, but officials are already looking at dozens of
other potential uses for AI within the health system over the longer term.

Joe Kelly, Mercy's executive vice president and chief transformation and business development officer, said the
health system is treading carefully, with an eye toward ethical considerations like data privacy. The health system
is developing its own AI "code of conduct."

"We're not going to rush," Kelly said. "I think it's really important to make sure that we do have the right safeguards
in place before we just deploy technology like this into the wild."

Dr. Lee Schwamm, professor of biomedical informatics and data sciences at Yale School of Medicine, said AI is
already used in many parts of the U.S. health care system. Machine learning and automation are used widely in
financial transactions. "Conversational AI," often used in retail to monitor satisfaction during customer service calls,
is beginning to spread into health care. Schwamm think's there is potential to use AI to write clinical notes, and to
offer doctors suggestions of possible diagnoses that line up with patient symptoms.

People working on AI programs in health care, Schwamm said, need to ensure that there is human supervision of
what the technology is doing or recommending. And they need to consider how transparent they are with patients.

"I think that the bigger question here is really not whether it's going to be part of health care. It's gonna be part of
health care, just like it's part of everything else. The biggest question will be: Will you know it when you're
interacting with it? And will you know when it has been used in your care?" Schwamm said.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
               Mercy looks to AI to relieve burden on health care workers, answer patients' questions

One of the first programs Mercy plans to introduce is a chatbot where patients would be able to ask questions and
get help understanding their lab results, which often hit patients' online medical portals before medical staff have a
chance to reach out and explain what the findings mean, Kelly said. The program should be able to cut back on
calls over basic questions, he said, and patients will always be able to reach out to medical staff for more
discussion if they want to.

Another program will take patients' calls and schedule appointments. A third is an internal chatbot tool, where staff
can find information about policies and procedures and answer HR-related questions.

Those first programs are just a few of the roughly 50 ideas Mercy leaders presented to Microsoft, as possible uses
for AI in the health system.

Kelly said these tools aren't expected to come at the expense of jobs. In an industry struggling with staffing
shortages, the hope is to reduce the time workers spend on tedious tasks, and give them more time to spend with
patients.

It wouldn't be Mercy's first time adopting this type of technology. Kelly said that for about a year now, Mercy has a
machine learning model that predicts roughly when a patient might be discharged, in hopes of preventing people
from spending more time in the hospital than they need to.

In the past, when a doctor determined a patient was ready for discharge, a staff member would then begin calling
around, looking for available space at a skilled nursing facility, rehabilitation hospital, or wherever the patient may
go next. It may take an extra day or two to find an available slot, which means the patient stayed longer in the
hospital than they wanted to, and the hospital would have one less available bed for new admissions.

Doctors always have the ability to overrule the technology, Kelly said, adding, "We don't want to have (AI) models
performing patient care." But in some cases, the prediction model meant that staff could start calling facilities and
say, "''Hey, four-and-a-half days from now, I will have a patient in need of a slot,'" Kelly said.

People working in this field are having conversations with regulators about appropriate safeguards, said Peter Lee,
corporate vice president of research and incubations at Microsoft. They are also discussing how to mitigate
potential biases that can be introduced by AI.

Kelly said the health system is taking a measured pace, despite the inclination to adopt AI tools soon.

"Health care has a massive staffing shortage, so there's a big desire to move quickly," he said. "But it's
counterbalanced by the desire to do this the right way and protect patient safety and privacy."

Lee said he sees potential to use AI to cut back on the time health care workers normally spend on paperwork -
from clinical notes, to notes referring patients to specialists, and notes justifying that lab tests or prescriptions
should be covered by insurance. It could also be used to inform doctors when there is a clinical trial that a patient
could participate in.

He also thinks the technology can be used as a backstop, to check for errors.

"I'm a big believer in using AI as a second set of eyes," Lee said. "Just make sure that any errors, any biases are
spotted, and that people are given a chance to rethink a decision or a calculation."

"Generative AI turns out to be incredibly good at reviewing, and evaluating, and critiquing, and spotting errors," Lee
said.

One company that provides electronic medical record software, Epic, has an AI-based tool with Microsoft that helps
doctors respond to patient emails more quickly. Lee said he's found that some patients sometimes like the AI-
assisted letters more, because they can add empathetic flourishes that doctors may not have time to.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 3
              Mercy looks to AI to relieve burden on health care workers, answer patients' questions



Graphic


 The entrance to Mercy Hospital on Ballas Road in Creve Coeur is seen on Thursday, July 7, 2022. Forbes has
reported that Generative AI could soon become a key weapon in the fight against cancer. An Oxford-based biotech
firm has created an immunotherapy drug with the help of generative AI. Veuer's Chloe Hurst has the story!


Load-Date: October 1, 2023


  
