

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                                  Southeast Texas hospitals employ new stroke technology




                 Southeast Texas hospitals employ new stroke technology
                                              The Beaumont Enterprise (Texas)
                                                September 27, 2022 Tuesday



Copyright 2022 The Beaumont Enterprise (Beaumont, Texas)

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 407 words
Byline: Kaitlin Bain, The Beaumont Enterprise, Texas

Body


Sep. 27—Southeast Texans experiencing a stroke may now see better outcomes.

Christus Southeast Texas has implemented new technology across its properties to provide 24/7 access to
neurologists with experience treating strokes and utilize artificial intelligence to improve communication across an
individual's care team and mobile image viewing.

According to a Christus news release, TeleSpecialists TeleStroke begins as soon as a patient with stroke-like
symptoms goes to the emergency room in an ambulance.

The technology connects the clinical team to a board-certified neurologist.

"Mounted on a mobile cart, the telemedicine technology allows a neurologist to participate in all aspects of the
neurological exam — from the CT scan to the physical exam and patient interview — before recommending a
course of treatment," the release said.

Stroke Facts by the Numbers:

5th Leading Cause of Death and Disability

400 Stroke Patients: Average number of stroke patients treated each year at CHRISTUS St. Elizabeth

3 Hours: From the onset of symptoms, this is the window of time in which a clot-busting medication can be given for
a better chance of recovery

45 Minutes: This is the national standard of time in which a patient, once arriving at the hospital, should be
diagnosed and administered a clot-busting medicine like Alteplase

35 Minutes: Exceeding national standards, CHRISTUS Southeast Texas St. Elizabeth Hospital's current year-to-
date time in which a patient comes in the door and receives medication is 10 minutes below the national goal

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                             Southeast Texas hospitals employ new stroke technology

Information from Christus Southeast Texas Health System

Viz.ai technology, which will be in use by Christus for the first time in the Southeast Texas region, picks up stroke-
related information "instantaneously" and sends it to physicians at stroke centers across the state.

"This is a cutting-edge and life-saving technology that's making a difference in the lives of many here in Southeast
Texas," Paul Trevino, President and CEO of CHRISTUS Southeast Texas Health System, said in the release.
"We're giving people a second chance at life, a smoother recovery and ensuring we have the modern technology
and resources available for all those we have the privilege to serve."

kaitlin.bain@beaumontenterprise.com

twitter.com/KaitlinBain

___ (c)2022 the Beaumont Enterprise (Beaumont, Texas) Visit the Beaumont Enterprise (Beaumont, Texas) at
www.beaumontenterprise.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: September 28, 2022


  
