

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 3
              Hard to track virus impact on Indigenous Inconsistent data masks Native American deaths




  Hard to track virus impact on Indigenous; Inconsistent data masks Native
                              American deaths
                                                     USA Today
                                               August 19, 2021 Thursday
                                                       2 Edition



Copyright 2021 USA Today All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 1207 words
Byline: By, Nada Hassanein, USA TODAY

Body


Abigail Echo-Hawk, a member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, has lost six fellow Native loved ones to COVID-
19.

She is not alone. Throughout the pandemic, Indigenous people were the most likely group to be hospitalized and
die of the virus, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, followed by Hispanic and Black
people.

But data from states, tribal health centers and federal sources are often inconsistent. American Indian and Alaska
Native people have long been misclassified in death records, marked white or Hispanic. A 2016 CDC report found
incorrect death certificate classification among American Indian and Alaska Native deaths was as high as 40%.

And a new study shows just how elusive the numbers can be, finding many states inconsistently or don't report
specific tribal data in death records.

It's why experts fear COVID-19 death rates among the Indigenous are likely even higher than the current estimates.

"I wish I didn't know that it's actually much, much higher," said Echo-Hawk, director of the Urban Indian Health
Institute, a tribal epidemiology center.

Despite national death certificate standards recommending funeral directors collect tribal information, there's no
requirement for states to follow the standard, found authors of the study released late last month in the American
Journal of Public Health.

That, coupled with the lack of accurate classification of American Indians, masks true death rates, as well as tribes'
specific public health concerns that make Indigenous and other people of color vulnerable to COVID-19 disparities.

"People don't think of themselves as American Indian or Alaska Native. They think of themselves as Cheyenne, as
Navajo, as Cherokee. That's our identity," said study author Desi Small-Rodriguez, professor at the University of

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 3
             Hard to track virus impact on Indigenous Inconsistent data masks Native American deaths

California, Los Angeles, Department of Sociology and American Indian Studies Program, who is Northern
Cheyenne and Chicana.

She wrote that along with complete race data, tribal nations need accurate information specific to their populations
to address concerns and "effectively govern" their nations.

The analysis, by Small-Rodriguez and Randall Akee, a professor with the Department of Public Policy and
American Indian Studies Program, who is Native Hawaiian, used 2017 and 2018 death certificate data, and found
that five states allowed reporting more than one tribal affiliation, associated with ethnicity, but not official enrollment
status, which is associated with the rights and responsibilities of a tribal member. Only two states collected Indian
reservation or tribal homeland residency data.

Nine states didn't collect any tribal data on their death certificates, according to the analysis. That includes
California, which has more than 100 tribes. It's also one of the top three states with the most Native Americans,
according to the latest estimates, along with Arizona and Oklahoma.

"This is not just a melting pot. There's a base foundation of people that are so rarely recognized or acknowledged
as the original keepers of this land," said Virginia Hedrick, a Yurok Tribe member of Karuk descent and director of
the California Consortium for Urban Indian Health. "We can't really do targeted efforts - we don't really know if a
certain tribe is experiencing higher COVID rates. And it could also be that there are tribes that have experienced
little to no COVID rates. And what are they doing right?"

It's hard to know, experts say.

"Without data disaggregated by tribal affiliation and tribal enrollment status, we are missing an important
demarcation of difference in health outcomes in the AI/AN population," Small-Rodriguez and Akee wrote.

Within her Northern Cheyenne tribe in Montana, Small-Rodriguez has lost several spiritual mentors in her tribe, and
three relatives, including a cousin. He left behind a 7-year-old daughter.

"I don't think there's been any family here on the reservation who hasn't been impacted," she said. At least 48
people have died of the virus in the tight-knit tribe of about 1,500 people. Many were the last fluent speakers of the
Northern Cheyenne language, she said.

"Every single one of us counts so much because there are so few of us," she said.

Echo-Hawk, who also is executive vice president of the Seattle Indian Health Board, calls the inconsistencies an
erasure that equates "data genocide." Her team also rated each state on how often American Indians were
misclassified in state COVID-19 data.

More than half of states, including California, scored a 'C' or below on the board's report card. New Mexico, with a
population of more than 10% American Indian, received a D+.

"We have these communities and counties across the nation who don't even know they have Native people in their
communities, because of the gross undercounting," she said. "They are effectively eliminating us in the data ...
eliminating our elders' last chance to tell a story that could benefit their community. They've even taken that last
chance from us."

She remembers rushing her son to a Seattle hospital after a severe leg injury. Intake staff classified her son as
white. She informed staff that American Indian and Alaska Native were options on intake forms, and argued her
son's race should be recorded correctly.

"I think about families who don't know what I know," Echo-Hawk said. "They probably would have just left it because
they're in the midst of incredible trauma. And in COVID-19 right now, it couldn't be more traumatizing."

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 3
             Hard to track virus impact on Indigenous Inconsistent data masks Native American deaths

When Echo-Hawk and her team reached out to federal and state partners for masks and other personal protective
equipment early on in the pandemic, the center instead received body bags. Echo-Hawk was stunned. The clinic
isn't an inpatient hospital.

She went home in tears that day. Over the following months, she spent hours turning one of the body bags into a
traditional ribbon dress, processing her grief and trauma and honoring those she'd lost. It's adorned with her
handprints, and the phrase "I am a tangible manifestation of my ancestors resiliency."

Crystal Echo Hawk, also is a Pawnee Nation member and founder of IllumiNative, a nonprofit that aims to improve
American Indian data and representation in educational materials and pop culture.

"Invisibility can be a matter of life or death, and I think we really learned that during COVID," she said. "Data leads
to resources. It leads to policy change. It leads to interventions that keep people safe and healthy."

She called the lack of reporting tragic.

"We'll just never know how many people we truly lost and the depth of the crisis in different places in this country,"
the IllumiNative CEO said. Because of lack of tribal data, she added, "a lot of tribes will never know completely how
many of their citizens they've lost."

Hedrick, a sociologist and public health specialist with a focus on maternal and child health, said her staff at the
consortium have been making sure to ask their grieving Native American community members whether their loved
ones' race, ethnicity and tribal affiliation were on their death certificates.

"It makes it very difficult for California tribes to really assess the deep impacts of COVID when we don't have tribal
affiliation listed," she said. "We're born Indian, and die white."



Graphic


Leticia Aguilar sit in her home in Elk Grove, Calif. , next to photos of her grandmother and aunt who passed away
from COVID-19 last year.

Salgu Wissmath for USA TODAY

Echo-Hawk


Load-Date: August 19, 2021


  
