

                                                                                            Page 1 of 2
    Case Study: Saving Employers $6M Annually Through Machine Learning + Value-Based Care Management




  Case Study: Saving Employers $6M Annually Through Machine Learning +
                      Value-Based Care Management
                                    College Heights Herald: Western Kentucky University
                                                      July 7, 2020 Tuesday



University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 761 words

Body

LOUISVILLE, Ky., July 7, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Working with national insurers and PBMs, Certilytics deploys its
sophisticated predictive analytics in support of value-based care management programs at dozens of large, self-
funded employers.



A recent analysis of those programs showed they save participating employers an average of over $200 per
member, per year , relative to previous care-management strategies. For a typical employer-with about 30,000
participating beneficiaries-this translates toannual savings of more than $6 million.

To achieve these savings, we help our customers move from retrospective reporting to prospective predictive
analytics-identifying members for outreach before they've incurred significant costs.

This includes identifying members at risk for high-cost events, such as an emergency room visits, along with
members at risk for developing chronic disease, such as diabetes. In the case of emerging clinical risk, we group
members into risk buckets based on their likelihood of developing chronic diseases, enabling our clients to track
progress in using care management strategies to move members from high risk to medium risk, or medium risk to
low risk. We also predict a member's likelihood of engagement, maximizing the chances that clinical interventions
will be effective.

Our advanced, predictive approach is not intended to replace an employer's existing health benefit and care
management programs. Instead, we seek to optimize those programs by acting as a centralized hub-the Nucleus
Data Warehouse-that can be deployed with ease and integrates with existing resources. We help employers
maximize the potential of their care management investments by analyzing utilization and engagement data to
predict which beneficiaries will take advantage when directed to the services that will have the greatest impact on
their health.

The data from our analysis shows our sophisticated approach to value-based care management is having the
intended effect, with cost savings that correspond with a positive shift in utilization patterns, including increased
medication adherence.

                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
   Case Study: Saving Employers $6M Annually Through Machine Learning + Value-Based Care Management

"As the predictive analytics space becomes more crowded, modelers must move beyond quoting validation
accuracies and show real-world results," said Certilytics Chief Data Scientist Robert Dwyer, PhD. "In this analysis
we used best-practice causal modeling approaches to show that our analytics-driven programs actually achieve
real-world savings on the order of hundreds of dollars PMPY."

The problem with traditional approaches to care management

Traditional approaches to value-based care management typically include identifying members for intervention
based on retrospective factors such as:
    •   Open Gaps in Care
    •   Historic Utilization / Costs
    •   Financial Risk

Unfortunately, these factors fail to provide care managers with a complete picture of their members' emerging
clinical risk profile. By the time care managers react based on open gaps in care or avoidable utilization, members
have oftentimes already incurred a significant (and avoidable) spike in their healthcare costs.

The Certilytics Approach

Certilytics enhances the member identification process with prospective analytics that account for a member's
likelihood of modifying behavior if targeted by a care manager.

Rather than focusing on members already diagnosed with chronic conditions, Certilytics' predictive models identify
members at high risk of developing chronic conditions, enabling earlier interventions to prevent high-cost events.
These models are aggregated into the Certilytics Health Index , an AI-powered proprietary algorithm that stratifies
members based on the optimal combination of three factors:
    •   Emerging Clinical Risk: the prospective likelihood of a member developing chronic diseases or utilizing
        high-cost services, such as the Emergency Room
    •   Prospective Financial Risk: a member's predicted financial risk over the next twelve months based on
        medical history, utilization patterns, gaps in care, demographic data, and other non-traditional data sources
    •   Propensity for Engagement: the likelihood a member will adjust behaviors because of outreach from a
        nurse or care manager

Because Certilytics' models account for a member's propensity for engagement, Certilytics has a substantial edge
over traditional approaches to value-based care management.

Contact us to hear more about our recent analysis and how we can save your organizations millions of dollars per
year through value-based care management.

Contact: Austin Wright Austin.wright@certilytics.com 804-698-9461


Load-Date: July 7, 2020


  
