

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 3
             Study finds 8,500 COVID deaths may have been avoided if more Missourians were vaccinated




Study finds 8,500 COVID deaths may have been avoided if more Missourians
                             were vaccinated
                                     The Griffon News: Missouri Western State College
                                                      June 2, 2022 Thursday



University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1116 words
Byline: Tessa Weinberg

Body


In Missouri, an estimated 8,585 deaths could have been avoided if 100% of adults were vaccinated, the analysis
found (Photo by Tessa Weinberg/Missouri Independent).

If all of Missouri's adults were vaccinated against COVID-19, more than half of the over 14,000 deaths attributed to
the virus since January 2021 may have been prevented, a new analysis concluded.

The analysis, performed by researchers at the Brown School of Public Health, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and Microsoft AI for Health, aims to explore an alternate scenario if
demand for the COVID-19 vaccine had continued at peak levels.

Using data from the New York Times and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that spanned January 2021
through April 2022, researchers found that nationwide, if every state had been able to vaccinate the entirety of their
adult populations, an estimated 318,981 deaths could have been averted.

In Missouri, an estimated 8,585 deaths could have been avoided if 100% of adults were vaccinated - ranking
Missouri seventh-highest when calculating vaccine preventable deaths per 1 million. That number drops to 6,595 if
90% were vaccinated and 5,571 if 85% were vaccinated.

"It's not surprising, but it's still sad to see those numbers," said Lynelle Phillips, president of the Missouri
Immunization Coalition and vice president of the Missouri Public Health Association.

There were 14,289 COVID-19 deaths during the span of the analysis. Altogether amid the pandemic, there have
been over 20,600 COVID-19 deaths in Missouri according to state data. More than 1 million died of the virus
nationwide - although experts say thousands of COVID deaths across the country went unreported.

"The state and the country have a choice to make about using a very effective tool we've been able to make
available fairly quickly in this pandemic," said Stefanie Friedhoff, a Brown University School of Public Health
professor and one of the analysis' authors. "If they choose not to, more people will die that don't have to die. That's
just very clear."

                                                                                                Page 2 of 3
           Study finds 8,500 COVID deaths may have been avoided if more Missourians were vaccinated

Friedhoff said the dashboard displaying vaccine-preventable deaths will continue to be updated.

In Missouri, vaccination rates have remained largely stagnant since the start of the year. As of Wednesday, nearly
66% of adults in Missouri were fully vaccinated - putting the state at the 10th lowest vaccination rate nationwide by
that measure, according to the CDC.

The state and the country have a choice to make about using a very effective tool we've been able to make
available fairly quickly in this pandemic. If they choose not to, more people will die that don't have to die. That's just
very clear.

- Stefanie Friedhoff, a Brown University School of Public Health professor

With COVID cases once again ticking upwards as more infectious variants of the coronavirus spread, the state's
leaders have yet to make a renewed push for vaccinations. In March, Gov. Mike Parson declared COVID-19 would
begin to be treated as endemic, similar to the seasonal flu. With the change came less frequent reporting of COVID
statistics, decreased contact tracing and vaccination data is no longer available on the state's dashboard.

Paula Nickelson, director of Missouri's health department, said during a press conference in March that the state
expects to see surges of cases and hospitalizations in the future, but that transitioning to an endemic phase will
allow the state to ramp back up as needed.

More from this section

HEALTH MINUTE: TOOLS TO HELP MIGRAINE SUFFERERS

Missouri university blames pandemic isolation for failing grades, mental health issues

Missouri sets up refunds of gas tax increase

"To be clear when we say 'ramp back up,' we will still not advocate for masks or vaccine mandates," Nickelson said
at the time. "We will not advocate for lockdowns."

Asked about the analysis' findings, Lisa Cox, a spokeswoman for the Department of Health and Senior Services,
said the state remains committed to making vaccines widely available and is making additional plans to provide
messaging regarding the benefits of staying up-to-date on vaccinations.

"It's been an extraordinary effort to make as much progress as we have in Missouri with COVID-19 vaccinations,"
Cox said, noting more than 9 million doses have been administered in just over 18 months.

Missouri's vaccine rollout faced a rocky start, with confusion and chaos marring the first months of the vaccine's
availability. Accusations swirled that rural areas were receiving more than their proportionate share as residents
from the state's metro areas drove hours to try to secure a shot. Meanwhile, disparities persisted with vaccine slow
to reach Black residents and the state trailing the nation in terms of nursing home staff vaccinations.

SUPPORT NEWS YOU TRUST. DONATE

The delta variant quickly tore through southern Missouri over the summer as some communities with low
vaccination rates largely resisted the vaccine. Roughly a dozen counties in rural areas of the state still have less
than 40% of their adult populations fully vaccinated.

In Missouri, efforts to provide financial incentives to encourage vaccinations saw limited success, with local gift card
incentives inspiring distrust from residents in some rural areas that viewed them as a form of government-
sponsored bribery.

Friedhoff said states that were more successful in vaccinating more of their residents and therefore had fewer
vaccine-preventable deaths were able to vaccinate their most vulnerable populations, like the eldery,

                                                                                                Page 3 of 3
           Study finds 8,500 COVID deaths may have been avoided if more Missourians were vaccinated

immunocompromised and communities of color. They have also more widely used mitigation measures, "and have
overall applied sort of a whole toolkit," Friedhoff said.

Missouri has never had a statewide mask mandate, and the attorney general has frequently sued cities, counties
and school districts who have imposed restrictions.

Phillips said the pandemic exposed holes in access to primary care, leaving residents with fewer trusted health
care providers to turn to for counseling on their vaccination decisions. Friedhoff said funding and investing in trusted
messengers and community organizations is especially important to make inroads on vaccination rates.

"Even though the public health system is discouraged, we should not give up," Phillips said. "We need to keep
pressing for these vaccines and need to make sure that especially people at highest risk are getting vaccinated."

GET THE MORNING HEADLINES DELIVERED TO YOUR INBOX SUBSCRIBE

The post Study finds 8,500 COVID deaths may have been avoided if more Missourians were vaccinated appeared
first on Missouri Independent.

Originally published on missouriindependent.com, part of the TownNews Content Exchange.


Load-Date: June 3, 2022


  
