

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 3
    Wearable tech may someday cloak us in greater public health Data could aid larger swath of society beyond
                                                    users




  Wearable tech may someday cloak us in greater public health; Data could
                 aid larger swath of society beyond users
                                                      USA Today
                                               December 27, 2022 Tuesday
                                                       1 Edition



Copyright 2022 USA Today All Rights Reserved

Section: OPINION; Pg. A7
Length: 951 words

Body


The marketing for the Apple Watch says it all: "A healthy leap ahead." "Here's to a healthier you." "The future of
health never looked so good." The Apple Watch, like countless other digital health apps and wearables, is selling
itself with an implicit promise of individual empowerment: that we can use this health information to take specific
actions - exercising so that your heart rate reaches a certain elevated threshold, for example - that will directly lead
to better health.

But in pitching and promising health to the individual, companies that make apps and wearables, and the
customers who buy them, are focusing on the trees - and missing the rest of the forest.

In truth, we have less control over our own health than we like to think. In fact, our health is heavily influenced by
our surroundings - including the health of the people around us.

What this might mean for the ever-growing market of wearables is a new focus beyond the individual, to those in
their household, their friends, even their whole community.

Mapping exercises - or diseases

By incorporating social and community factors, digital health products could better capture what goes into public
health. Communitywide data from fitness trackers and other digital data already feed into some public health
models.

Fitbit publishes reports that show, for example, communities where people exercise the most. Cellphone location
data is sometimes used to map disease outbreaks. These models and their underlying datasets could prove to be a
boon to those people and agencies responsible for protecting and improving all of our health.

Aggregated health data that reflects communitywide factors has for centuries now aided public health practitioners,
allowing them to make seemingly simple improvements that nonetheless greatly impact people's lives.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 3
   Wearable tech may someday cloak us in greater public health Data could aid larger swath of society beyond
                                                   users

Returning home from the hospitals of the mid-19th century Crimean War filled with sick and injured British soldiers,
Florence Nightingale sought to use data she had meticulously collected to demonstrate the impact that community
factors had on soldiers' health.

Nightingale famously employed powerful graphics to convince Britain's leaders that measures to improve sanitation
- such as cleaning the air water, and sewer systems - could prevent disease and dramatically decrease deaths.

The new Nightingales

The world still faces enormous public health challenges, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. But we also
have new cards to play, such as the vast repositories of health sensor data and powerful artificial intelligence
techniques that can help us make sense of it.

Using these tools to improve health devices and apps could be a major opportunity to tackle these massive
community challenges.

Among the most troubling recent public health concerns is the teen mental health crisis. Seeking to address rising
suicides, a Harvard-led research project pools health data from many people and uses artificial intelligence to make
it more useful, like combining smartphone and Fitbit data to understand indicators of suicide.

The hope is that marrying AI and health sensor data could help build an early warning system for people at risk of
suicide. For now, this research remains academic.

And a major challenge is that suicide is still relatively rare, generating little data that algorithms can use to make
predictions. But like many other health events, suicide risk doesn't occur in a vacuum.

Suicides might seem like isolated acts, but they often occur in clusters - what researchers call suicide contagion.
What if suicide prediction algorithms, like the one being built at Harvard, could incorporate a social element from
health sensor data like your friend network?

Digital health products could feed into social network algorithms that help identify when people need mental health
resources. A wearable that tracks only your mood and sleep might intervene only based on those metrics. But a
social-enabled algorithm might be able to go several steps further, recognizing troubling trends among one's close
contacts - such as social media posts suggesting self-harm, and thus when someone might themselves be at
greater risk for suicide.

Privacy concerns

There are, to be sure, many hurdles to using social and community data in digital health products. Some users may
have privacy concerns about sharing data with companies or public health agencies.

Overcoming these hurdles could involve developing open source standards for transparency about data
management, or ensuring that people can control when, and with which agencies, to share personal data.

Even so, the opportunity remains too great to ignore. Although digital health products can, and already do, benefit
individuals, by far the greatest benefits could one day come when these products operate in tandem with
information about the community and beyond the individual.

Right now, it is likely a wealthier and thus already-healthier set of people that tend to purchase digital health
products. This fits a historical pattern, where new technologies such as computers cater to select individuals, only
later expanding to serve broader communities.

For digital health companies to credibly claim to improve people's health - to truly, as they promise, become "the
future of health" - their next step could be an increased willingness to look beyond an individualized notion of
health and to work with public health agencies.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 3
   Wearable tech may someday cloak us in greater public health Data could aid larger swath of society beyond
                                                   users

In doing so, digital health products stand to benefit a far greater swath of society, even those who aren't wearing
wearables.

Douglas Yeung, a senior behavioral scientist at the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND Corporation, is a faculty member
of the Pardee RAND Graduate School.

Douglas Yeung

RAND Corporation



Graphic


The Apple Watch is marketed as "The future of health," but Douglas Yeung says a focus beyond the user may be
the real future.

Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP


Load-Date: December 27, 2022


  
