

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                              Adventist nurses receive a gift of gratitude




                                Adventist nurses receive a gift of gratitude
                                                        The Bakersfield Californian
                                                        November 8, 2021 Monday



Copyright 2021 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.)

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 390 words
Byline: John Cox, The Bakersfield Californian

Body


Nov. 8—It's not just the thought that counts. The caffeine scores points, too.

A local medical specialist who worries people are beginning to forget the invaluable contributions of health-care
workers on Monday delivered a special gift to the nursing staff of Adventist Health Bakersfield on Chester Avenue.

With close to a dozen masked nurses lined up behind him near the main entrance of the hospital, Stockdale
Podiatry owner Dr. Brandon Hawkins presented a gift of 900 Starbucks gift cards, each good for $5.

That's $4,500 worth of java for a hard-working group of people he says have helped the community through the
pandemic, largely without much fanfare as public recognition of the crisis seems to be fading.

"We have appreciated our nurses and we feel like they have not been appreciated in our community," said
Hawkins, who also works at the hospital.

He added that his gift carries a message for the rest of the community: Don't forget about the health-care workers
on whom the pandemic has been especially hard.

About two years ago Hawkins and his wife donated a quarter of a million dollars to help pay for the Estella
Espericueta Memorial Garden at the nearby Adventist Health AIS Cancer Center. Hawkins said Monday it felt like
time to do something more especially for nurses.

"They have long hours (and a) hard job," he said. "Just thinking about others instead of ourselves is definitely a
gesture we wanted to do."

The hospital's nurse leader, Heather Von Housen, said the gift cards will provide literal fuel to people working long
hours to keep others alive and healthy day in, day out.

But more than that, she said it serves as recognition that, with more than 60 COVID-19 patients still being treated at
the Adventist Health Bakersfield campus Monday, the pandemic isn't over.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                                      Adventist nurses receive a gift of gratitude

"It's really hard work and I'm not sure that the general public knows," she said, adding that members of the general
public have shown waves of support for health-care workers but that the gratitude seems to have waned despite
the continuing need for committed nurses.

"I'm just so proud of them," Von Housen said. "They are hard-working, humble and doing sacred work."

___ (c)2021 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at
www.bakersfield.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: November 9, 2021


  
