

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                               AI Impact On Mammograms, Breast Health & The OBGYN Field




            AI Impact On Mammograms, Breast Health & The OBGYN Field
                                              Glendale Register (Queens, New York)
                                                         February 2, 2023



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Glendale Register (Queens, NY), Queens Ledger/Greenpoint Star Inc.

Section: HEALTH
Length: 611 words
Byline: web

Body


Artificial intelligence (AI) has invaded our daily lives, and in the last decade, there have been very promising
applications of AI in the field of medicine, including medical imaging, in vitro diagnosis, intelligent rehabilitation,
Gynecology and prognosis. Artificial intelligence (AI) is commonly defined as "a system's ability to correctly interpret
external data, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through
flexible adaptation".

Over the past 50 years, the dramatic growth of computer functions related to big data intrusion has pushed AI
applications into new areas. Breast cancer is one of the common malignant tumors in women and seriously
threatens women's physical and mental health. Early screening for breast cancer via mammography, ultrasound
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can significantly improve the prognosis of patients. AI has shown excellent
performance in image recognition tasks and has been widely studied in breast cancer screening. This paper
introduces the background of AI and its application in breast medical imaging (mammography, ultrasound and
MRI), such as in the identification, segmentation and classification of lesions; breast density assessment; and
breast cancer risk assessment. In addition, we also discuss the challenges and future perspectives of the
application of AI in medical imaging of the breast.

Mammography, a breast exam, is one of the most widely used methods for breast cancer screening.
Mammography is a non-invasive detection method associated with relatively low pain, easy operation, high
resolution, and good repeatability. The retained image can be compared before and after and is not limited by age
or body shape. Mammography can detect breast masses that cannot be palpated by doctors and can reliably
identify benign lesions and malignant tumors of the breast. Mammograms are currently acquired with full-field digital
mammography (DM) systems and are provided in both for-processing (the raw imaging data) and for-presentation.
To date, AI has been used to analyze mammography images in most studies mainly for the detection and
classification of breast mass and microcalcifications, breast mass segmentation, breast density assessment, breast
cancer risk assessment and image quality improvement.

Breast Cancer Risk Assessment

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                          AI Impact On Mammograms, Breast Health & The OBGYN Field

The high incidence and mortality of breast cancer are seriously threatening women's physical and mental health. At
present, there are many known risk factors for breast cancer. These include aging, family history, reproductive
factors (early menarche, late menopause, late age at first pregnancy and low parity), estrogen (endogenous and
exogenous estrogens), lifestyle (excessive alcohol consumption, too much dietary fat intake, smoking) are all risk
factors for breast cancer. The early detection and prevention of breast cancer can be promoted by increasing the
overall understanding and recognition of breast cancer risk.

Relevant literature shows that the research of AI in breast cancer risk prediction is also very extensive. As a result,
AI predicts breast cancer risk with higher accuracy than other methods, which in turn helps physicians guide high-
risk populations to conduct appropriate interventions to reduce the incidence of breast cancer.

------------

Contributed with help from our Glendale Register & Queens Ledger Featured Gynecologist: EMU Breast Surgery,
Exams & Mammograms Center of Queens 8340 Woodhaven Blvd Ste 6, Queens, NY 11385 (929) 299-6124
https://www.emuhealth.com/womens-health/mammography/.

You May Also Be Interested In Reading About: OBGYN Trends Going Into 2023 Post Roe V Wade


Load-Date: February 17, 2023


   
