

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 2
    Mobile health care brings home visits to North County residents Partnership provides nonemergency medical
                                                        care




          Mobile health care brings home visits to North County residents;
                 Partnership provides nonemergency medical care
                                                 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                                                    March 31, 2022 Thursday
                                                            Final Edition



Copyright 2022 The San Diego Union-Tribune All Rights Reserved

Section: LOCAL; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 598 words
Byline: Linda McIntosh

Body


Nonemergency in-home medical visits to older adults in North County started in February through a partnership
between DocGo, a New York-based provider of last-mile Mobile Health services and the nonprofit San Marcos-
based Gary and Mary West program known as PACE, which stands for Program of All-Inclusive Care for the
Elderly.

The partnership increases access to care outside the traditional hospital setting for residents age 55 and older who
might find it difficult or risky because of COVID-19 to go in person for a nonemergency medical visit. The aim is to
bridge the gap between physical and virtual care.

DocGo's partnership with West PACE is its first such collaboration in Southern California, according to DocGo.

West PACE's nursing team can dispatch DocGo clinicians to patients' homes via the company's Mobile Health
program, which combines AI-powered dispatch technology and concierge medical services from credentialed
health care professionals. The team can treat a variety of nonemergency conditions in the home and offers
services ranging from rapid and pre-op testing, ultrasounds, wound care, cardiac and blood pressure monitoring to
COVID-19 testing and vaccinations, physicals, oral and IV treatments.

West PACE is known as a specialized health care program for older adults of all income levels who want to live as
independently as possible in their own homes. West PACE's services include medical, dental, mental health,
medication management, nutrition, physical and occupational therapy and social activities, run from their center in
San Marcos.

The West PACE program was established through a grant from the Gary and Mary West Foundation and meets
state requirements for nursing home level of care as covered by Medicare and Medi-Cal, according to West PACE
officials.

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2
   Mobile health care brings home visits to North County residents Partnership provides nonemergency medical
                                                       care

West PACE connected with DocGo last spring through a joint research collaboration with West Health, a family of
nonprofit organizations working on lowering health care costs to support successful aging. The groups studied how
Mobile Health services and business-to-business relationships can streamline care and reduce avoidable
emergency department visits.

DocGo, which was founded in 2015 under the name "Ambulnz," is now a publicly traded company with the goal of
providing high-quality, affordable care to patients across the U.S. and in the U.K. through its staff of more than
3,500 health care providers.

"Not only have the health systems experienced significant cost savings and reductions in nonemergency visits, but
the patient experience and feedback has been overwhelming," said Caroline Hodge, vice president of clinical
growth and strategy at DocGo.

In response to ongoing industry staffing shortages, the company started two full-service, tuition-free programs for
health care professionals to advance their careers and for entry-level workers to get into the health care industry.

"Our partnership with DocGo will enable us to reach even more participants who may have difficulty getting to their
medical appointments or our facilities in San Marcos," said Dr. Ross Colt, medical director of Gary and Mary West
PACE.

In order to get DocGo services through the West PACE partnership, patients have to be West PACE participants.
Patients who are eligible for both Medicare and MediCal, or for MediCal only, are not charged co-payments for
DocGo services, and others who want to pay privately can also enroll in the program, according to West PACE.

To apply or learn more about eligibility, call Gary and Mary West PACE at (760) 280-2230 or visit westpace.org.

linda.mcintosh@sduniontribune.com


Load-Date: April 1, 2022


  
