

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                              Local health systems leverage AI for better outcomes, efficiency




           Local health systems leverage AI for better outcomes, efficiency
                                                   Crain's New York Business
                                                          July 24, 2023
                                                          Print Version



Copyright 2023 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 19; Vol. 39
Length: 879 words
Byline: JACQUELINE NEBER

Body


Local organizations are taking their own bets on how to best deploy artificial intelligence as the technology takes
root within the health care system at large.

Crain's spoke with health systems in the area to understand how they are experimenting and investing in AI and
found that using the technology to predict patient outcomes, expedite analysis of medical images and lighten the
load of administrative tasks for physicians are some major use cases.

Medical imaging lends itself to using AI because the technology can help doctors interpret images faster and detect
issues sooner, according to Dr. James Tsai, president of the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

Tsai is the founding director of the Center for Ophthalmic Artificial Intelligence and Human Health at the Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which launched on July 3. The center's goal is to use AI to diagnose eye
diseases such as glaucoma, macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy faster, which can help prevent vision
loss, according to Sinai. Researchers will work with Icahn students and Sinai's Windreich Department of Artificial
Intelligence and Human Health to build the infrastructure for using AI in critical care, which will let the system
incorporate tools quickly as they are approved, Tsai said.

AI can also help health systems move patients out of the hospital faster by streamlining physicians' work. At New
York-Presbyterian, leaders have experimented with AI since 2017 to accomplish that goal. Leo Bodden, the group
vice president and chief digital and technology officer at NYP, said tools help track which tasks need to be done for
patients, such as lab work, and "nudge" physicians to complete them.

The system has launched several initiatives recently to tighten workflow, Bodden said, with predictive machine
learning, imaging, robotic process automation, conversational AI and general robotics. Some pilot programs strive

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                           Local health systems leverage AI for better outcomes, efficiency

to reduce the amount of documentation doctors must complete and help radiologists interpret images faster, for
example.

NYU Langone, too, is using generative AI to read patient notes and tackle administrative tasks. The technology can
help detect gaps in care, said Dr. Jonathan Austrian, associate chief medical information officer of inpatient
informatics at NYU Langone Health.

If a physician notes that a patient needs blood clot prevention medication, for example, but the technology doesn't
see an order for that prescription, the system will alert the physician of the discrepancy, he said. NYU is beginning
to deploy more sophisticated general language AI models in these cases.

Comb through data

Additionally, AI can be used to interact with patients, educate them during vulnerable periods and improve
outcomes. On Long Island, Northwell Health is using AI to improve maternal health outcomes through a chatbot
product called Pregnancy Chats, which aims to reduce maternal mortality rates by communicating with patients
about their symptoms. The chatbot can encourage patients to go to the hospital or connect them with Northwell
physicians. The tool is one of the health system's Center for Maternal Health initiatives to address maternal health
risks.

Northwell developed the chatbot in collaboration with Conversa Health, a software company based in Portland,
Oregon. Northwell invested $5.5 million into Conversa before Conversa was acquired by Amwell, a virtual care
company in Boston, according to Richard Mulry, president and chief executive of Northwell Holdings.

More broadly, AI can be used to comb through patient data to identify which individuals are at a higher risk for
negative health outcomes and close care gaps. At Ascertain, Northwell's joint venture with Aegis Ventures,
scientists are using data from more than 100,000 records to help providers better understand patients' maternal
mortality risks and help patients better understand dangerous symptoms of conditions such as preeclampsia, said
Dr. Michael Nimaroff, senior vice president of Northwell's obstetrics and gynecology service line.

Northwell and Aegis committed to investing $100 million in launching Ascertain, Mulry said.

While the wealth of available medical data means the health care industry is ripe to benefit from AI, utilizing the
data comes with watchouts.

Exposing sensitive data, such as patient and billing information, to new tools opens up already-vulnerable hospitals
to data breaches, according to Marion Lewis, chief executive of Govenda, a governance management firm that
works with several New York health systems. She noted patients' privacy concerns and AI's potential for bias when
it comes to care disparities among underserved patients that already exist in the industry.

Additionally, despite AI's potential benefits, doctors also warned of their concerns around the technology. Tsai
called some potential AI algorithms a "black box" that makes it impossible for doctors to understand why they're
getting certain results.

He also has concerns about the technology's limitations, how the health system will be reimbursed for using it, its
financial sustainability and patient acceptance, he said.

To combat these concerns, Tsai said, human specialists will have to remain involved, checking AI's conclusions at
every step of the process.


Load-Date: July 27, 2023


  
