

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                                    Young ‘surprised’ by bipartisan agreement on AI




                       Young ‘surprised’ by bipartisan agreement on AI
                                                        TheHill.com
                                               November 28, 2023 Tuesday



Copyright 2023 NEXSTAR MEDIA INC. All Rights Reserved

Section: TECH LATEST
Length: 1006 words
Byline: Rebecca Klar

Body


Welcome to The Hill’s Technology newsletter {beacon}

Technology

Technology

The Big Story

Young ‘surprised’ by bipartisan agreement on AI

Sen. Todd Young (R-Ind.) said Tuesday he’s been encouraged and “a little surprised” by the bipartisan agreement
among senators so far during the closed-door AI Insight Forums.

© Photo Credit

Young, speaking at the Axios AI+ Summit, said as Congress continues to mull regulation about artificial intelligence
(AI) through the committee process, partisan disagreements may emerge .

He said labor issues related to AI may be a point of contention.

“I expected more disagreement when it came to the role government should play, the extent to which we should
protect workers in various ways from the technology. There haven’t been very significant disagreements,” Young
said.

He expects there will be“more disagreement” among senators about the extent the role of government should play
as the process moves through committees to consider regulation.

Young added that lawmakers may also appear less willing to compromise once “ television cameras are turned on
and there is an expectation, to put it charitably, from ones’ constituents that their members of the Senate or their
members of Congress to fight for the perspective of their constituents of for their base.”

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 3
                                  Young ‘surprised’ by bipartisan agreement on AI

Young is one of four senators on Majority Leader Chuck Schumer’s (D-N.Y.) small bipartisan group in charge of
Senate discussions about AI regulation. Schumer and the group have convened a series of AI Insight Forums —
including industry experts, tech company CEOs and civil rights leaders — to discuss the benefits and risks of AI.

The Senate is holding its seventh AI Insight Forum on Wednesday afternoon, focused on intellectual property and
copyright issues. The forum will include a negotiator from SAG-AFTRA, a union representing actors that recently
won protections from AI , along with representatives from Sony Music Entertainment, the Motion Picture
Association and Spotify.

Read more in a full report at TheHill.com .

Welcome to The Hill’s Technology newsletter , we’re Rebecca Klar and Julia Shapero — tracking the latest moves
from Capitol Hill to Silicon Valley.

Did someone forward you this newsletter? Subscribe here.

Essential Reads

How policy will be impacting the tech sector now and in the future:

Judge recuses himself from Elon Musk’s case against Media Matters

The judge presiding over tech billionaire Elon Musk’s lawsuit against Media Matters for America has recused
himself from the case, according to court documents. In a notice filed with the court on Tuesday, Judge Mark
Pittman of the U.S. District Court in Northern Texas wrote that he was recusing himself from the case and
requested the clerk of the court assign it to another judge. Pittman, who was appointed to his position …

Full Story

Ransomware attack forces hospitals in multiple states to divert some emergency room patients

Hospitals in multiple states have been diverting patients from their emergency rooms due to a recent cyberattack on
a major health system. Ardent Health Services, a company that owns hospitals in six states, said Monday that it
had been victimized by a cyber event on Thanksgiving that turned out to be a ransomware attack. “As a result,
Ardent proactively took its network offline, suspending all user access to its information …

Full Story

The Refresh

News we’ve flagged from t he intersection of tech and other topics:

Amazon launching AI-powered chatbot

Amazon plans to launch an AI-powered chatbot called Q for customers of its cloud computing company Amazon
Web Services (AWS), TechCrunch reported .

General Motors cuts spending on Cruise

General Motors (GM) plans to cut spending on its self-driving unit Cruise , after an accident in October injured a
pedestrian and prompted the company to suspend all self-driving operations nationwide, Financial Times reported .

On Our Radar

Upcoming news themes and events we’re watching:

The House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health will hold a hearing on “Understanding How AI Is
Changing Health Care” on Wednesday at 10:30 a.m. ET.

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 3
                                  Young ‘surprised’ by bipartisan agreement on AI

The Hill Jobs

Interested in exploring a new career? Visit The Hill Jobs Board to discover millions of roles worldwide, including:

Senior Product Manager, Customer Data Platform — Remitly, Seattle Apply

Director of Corporate Finance & Strategy — OpenGov, Chicago Apply

Senior Technology Sales Representative – Government & Education Specialist — Konica Minolta Business
Solutions, U.S.A., Inc., Washington, D.C. Apply

Director of Global Government Sales — Kaseware, Inc., Denver Apply

Click here to get your job mentioned

In Other News

Branch out with other reads on The Hill:

Sports Illustrated is the latest media company damaged by an AI experiment gone wrong

NEW YORK (AP) — Computer-generated writers … writing computer-generated stories? Sports Illustrated is the
latest media company to see its reputation damaged by being less than forthcoming — if not outright dishonest —
about who or what is writing its stories at the dawn of the artificial intelligence …

Full Story

Amazon launches Q, a business chatbot powered by generative artificial intelligence

NEW YORK (AP) — Amazon finally has its answer to ChatGPT. The tech giant said Tuesday it will launch Q — a
business chatbot powered by generative artificial intelligence. The announcement, made in Las Vegas at an annual
conference the company hosts for its AWS cloud computing service, represents …

Full Story

What Others are Reading

Two key stories on The Hill right now:

Winds take down National Christmas Tree

The National Christmas Tree was toppled over on Tuesday by heavy winds on Washington D.C.’s chilliest day
since last winter. The massive tree, … Read more

Biden Labor nominee stalls in Senate after Manchin, Menendez vote with GOP

President Biden’s nominee to serve as assistant secretary of the Labor Department, Jose Javier Rodriguez, stalled
in the Senate Tuesday after Democratic … Read more

You’re all caught up. See you tomorrow!

For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to The Hill.


Load-Date: January 11, 2024


  
