

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 21
                                                 NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE




                                          NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE
                                                   Crain's New York Business
                                                          August 10, 2020
                                                           Print Version



Copyright 2020 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 17; Vol. 36
Length: 14455 words

Body


New York's health care sector is no stranger to disaster.

Many of its doctors, nurses and scientists, among other players, have served on the front lines of crises dating back
to the AIDS/HIV outbreak of the 1980s.

Very few, however, were fully prepared for the tragedy that unfolded earlier this year as the novel coronavirus
spread through the region. The Covid-19 outbreak that officially claimed its first life in March at a Brooklyn hospital
became the city's worst mass casualty since the influenza outbreak of 1918.

And yet, as might be expected, the region's health care sector mounted a gritty response. Doctors and nurses
worked to save lives in underfunded public hospitals. Many contracted Covid-19 and, after recovering at home,
returned to the front lines.

Scientists at academic medical centers and drug companies joined the global race to develop therapies, and some
now lead the way. Nonprofits found ways to offer free Covid-19 testing, food and other critical resources to the city's
hardest-hit communities.

The examples of courage, compassion, grit and ingenuity are seemingly endless.

This year's Notable in Health Care special report, presented by Montefiore-Einstein, shines a light on many of
those stories. It features the people who helped bend the region's steep infection curve downward and are still
working to alleviate the economic and humanitarian toll.

This report recognizes the innovation in health care that predates the crisis and arose from it, including the
advances in telemedicine and scientific research.

It honors those working to fight health care disparities and other societal problems that the pandemic accentuated
and that are seen anew through the lens of recent demonstrations against racial injustice.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

JUDITH ABERG, MD Chief, division of infectious diseases and immunology, Mount Sinai Health System Director,
infectious diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

Dr. Judith Aberg, an HIV and AIDS researcher, is on the leading edge of efforts to develop effective Covid-19
treatments. At Mount Sinai, she's researching the use of plasma from people who have recovered from Covid-19 as
a possible defense against the disease.

Hundreds of Covid-19 patients have participated in her study at Mount Sinai, which recently formed a partnership
with a leading drug manufacturer to test whether a drug derived from the plasma of recovered Covid-19 patients
helps prevent infection. If effective, the drug would offer protection for health care and other essential workers until
a vaccine is available.

LEONARD ACHAN, RN President, Innovation Institute, Hospital for Special Surgery Cofounder and chairman,
Quality Reviews Inc.

As a C-suite executive, entrepreneur and academic, Leonard Achan has worked on the cutting edge of health care
innovation for more than two decades. Achan, who began his med- ical career in nursing, joined the Hospital for
Special Surgery as its chief innovation officer in 2016. Three years later he rose to president of the Innovation
Institute, where he leads commercialization of the hospital's inventions in musculoskeletal care. Achan is the co-
founder and chairman of Quality Reviews Inc., which builds proprietary digital platforms for health care providers
that offer real-time feedback from patients and employees. Before joining HSS, Achan was chief communications
officer and chief of access services of the Mount Sinai Health System. At the same time he served as senior
associate dean for global communications, branding and reputation at the Icahn School of Medicine.

GIL ADDO Co-founder and chief executive officer RubiconMD

Driven by his family's experience navigating the health care system, Gil Addo co-founded RubiconMD in 2013 to
bridge the gap between primary and specialty care. Since then, the Manhattan company has raised more than $40
million in funding, including an $18 million round in March. Through its digital platform, RubiconMD allows primary
care doctors to consult specialists online, making complex care available without patients needing to travel or wait
for the next available appointment. The strategy is well suited for the Covid-19 era. Addo was inspired to start
RubiconMD after his grandmother, diagnosed with a brain tumor, began commuting from her home in Barbados to
Boston for surgery and post-op appointments.

CARA AGERSTRAND, MD Associate professor of clinical medicine, division of pulmonary, allergy and critical care
medicine Columbia University Irving Medical Center/New York-Presbyterian Hospital

To keep up with the surge of Covid-19 patients in city hospitals earlier this year, pulmonologists such as Dr. Cara
Agerstrand acted as clinical supervisors, training and watching over teams of doctors and nurses with less
experience in treating seriously ill patients. How colleagues learned new skills under pressure was impressive,
Agerstrand said, adding she was grateful her skills, education and training enabled her to give back during the
crisis. Agerstrand has extensive experience in clinical care, research and education. She is the director of the
medical extracorporeal membrane oxygenation program, which focuses on a specialized life support that acts as a
temporary artificial lung.

SALOMON AMAR, DDS Vice president for research and professor, New York Medical College Provost for
biomedical research, Touro College and University System

Dr. Salomon Amar has been the driving force behind a partnership between New York Medical College and
pharmaceutical giant Regeneron to determine whether a drug that is used to treat inflammation is an effective
treatment for critically ill Covid-19 patients. Early on in New York's Covid-19 outbreak, he worked closely in a multi-
industry effort to expedite approval for the clinical trial of Regeneron's Kevzara at Westchester Medical Center. The
trial began just three weeks after New York reported its first Covid-19 case. Approval for such clinical trials normally
takes at least six months. His leadership has helped create a model for partnerships among medical schools, drug
companies and hospitals.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

ZEYAD BAKER, MD President and chief executive officer OptumCare Tristate Region

OptumCare recently tapped Dr. Zeyad Baker to oversee its physician practices in New York, New Jersey and
southern Connecticut. OptumCare has about 1,500 doctors in the region and, with significant growth in Connecticut,
plans to add hundreds more doctors by year's end. For the past two years, Baker has led OptumCare's ProHealth,
one of the largest medical groups in the Northeast. In that role he spearheaded initiatives to improve care, the
patient experience and access to care. Baker, a former pediatrician, previously was co-president of New Jersey's
Riverside Medical Group, which he helped grow into a group practice of nearly 300 providers before Optum
purchased it in 2016.

GINA BARTASI Founder and chief executive officer Kindbody

An entrepreneur and the mother of in-vitro-fertilization twins, Gina Bartasi is shaking up the fertility care business
with her latest startup, Kindbody. Bartasi founded the health-tech company in 2018 in response to a demand
among employers to buy fertility benefits directly from health care providers. Kindbody raised $32 million in July to
fund further expansion. It has raised about $64 million in all from investors that include the venture capital arm of
Google parent Alphabet. The Manhattan company sells fertility-benefit packages to employers and offers
gynecological services at its clinics and through more than 200 partner clinics. Demand has been strong for virtual
fertility consultations. Kindbody's revenue was 30% higher in June than in February, before the first case of Covid-
19 was identified in New York.

DAVID BATTINELLI, MD Senior vice president and chief medical officer Northwell Health

Dr. David Battinelli was among the highest-profile figures during New York's Covid-19 outbreak, and it's not hard to
see why. Northwell, the state's largest health care provider, treated about 50,000 more Covid-19 patients than any
other provider. Battinelli led a Northwell advisory group charged with overseeing clinical care, policies and
standards for treating Covid-19, and he made media appearances to share insights into the pandemic. Battinelli has
a wide-ranging portfolio at Northwell. Passionate about medical education and professional development, he runs a
Northwell leadership-development program that has trained more than 150 clinicians. In addition, he helped
develop the curriculum for the Zucker School of Medicine, where he is vice dean.

ALLON BLOCH Cofounder, chief executive officer K Health

In 2016 Allon Bloch parlayed his wide-ranging experience as a serial entrepreneur and venture capitalist to cofound
K Health, a digital primary care service that uses artificial intelligence. The startup, which launched its product in
mid-2018, raised $48 million in its Series C round in February, bringing total funding to $97.3 million. K Health
offers a free AI-powered app to assess a patient's symptoms, then lets the user, for a fee, schedule a telehealth
visit with a doctor for personalized care and prescriptions. Bloch previously was the co-CEO of Wix, a website
publishing platform, cofounder and CEO of online car retailer Vroom and CEO of mySupermarket, a digital platform
for grocery shopping. He was a venture partner at Greylock Partners and a general partner at Jerusalem Venture
Partners.

MICHAEL R. BLOOMBERG Chief executive officer Bloomberg LP Former mayor, New York City

Billionaire entrepreneur Michael Bloomberg doesn't suffer from a lack of name recognition. The former New York
City mayor is the CEO of a major media company headquartered in the city, and briefly this year he was a Dem-
ocratic presidential candidate. Not everyone, however, is familiar with his commitment to improve public health, a
major focus of grantmaking by his foundation, Bloomberg Philanthropies. Recently the three-term mayor launched a
major effort to help fight the Covid-19 pandemic, including supporting mayors through a partnership with public
health and management experts at Johns Hopkins and Harvard, and committing $40 million to help low- and
middle-income countries fight the coronavirus. As mayor, he and his team developed a pandemic influenza plan for
New York and led the city through the H1N1 virus outbreak. Bloomberg has been a global ambassador for the
World Health Organization.

PATRICK BORGEN, MD Chair, department of surgery Maimonides Medical Center

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

Dr. Patrick Borgen helped lead one of New York's hardest-hit hospitals through the Covid-19 crisis, and he
continues to battle the disease through his research efforts. Borgen chairs the surgery department at Maimonides
Medical Center and its medical science committee. He is in charge of the hospital's efforts to participate in clinical
trials for Covid-19 therapies and treatment protocols. As part of a study led by Minnesota's Mayo Clinic, he
manages convalescent plasma research. Under Borgen and other hospital leaders, Maimonides took diverse
measures to care for legions of critically ill Covid-19 patients. In May the 711-bed hospital in Brooklyn's Borough
Park celebrated a milestone, discharging its 1,000th Covid-19 patient.

ANTHONY BOUTIN, MD Interim president and chief executive officer, chief medical officer NuHealth

Dr. Anthony Boutin, a champion for the underprivileged, is leading a safety-net hospital through a leadership
transition and the Covid-19 crisis. In his role at NuHealth, Boutin leads Nassau University Medical Center, a
challenged but essential Nassau County hospital. Boutin, a former chair of the medical center's department of
emergency medicine, was named chief medical officer last year and interim president and CEO in January. A few
months later he rolled out a preparedness plan to help the medical center handle an anticipated surge of Covid-19
patients. The plan called for sourcing and stockpiling critical supplies and launching a staffing task force, among
other steps that ultimately helped the 530-bed hospital care for large numbers of Covid-19 patients.

DANIEL BRILLMAN Cofounder and chief executive officer Unite Us

Studies show the U.S. spends more on health care than many other countries, yet lags on issues such as chronic
disease and obesity. Part of the problem, according to Daniel Brillman's Unite Us, is the long-standing disconnect
between health and social service providers. Brillman, an Air Force Reserve pilot who cofounded Unite Us in 2013,
wants to help bridge that gap. The company has an outcome-tracking technology platform that connects health
care providers and social services groups. It focuses on food, housing and other social determinants of health.
Unite Us, which initially concentrated on matching veterans to support services, has raised more than $45 million.
This year it made its first acquisition, Staple Health, a social-determinants data firm.

KELLIE BRYANT Assistant professor of nursing and executive director Helene Fuld Health Trust Simulation
Center, Columbia University School of Nursing

Known for her calm demeanor and commitment to advancing nursing, Kellie Bryant has transformed the way
Columbia University's School of Nursing educates future health care providers. She's especially proud of her
successful campaign to outfit the Helene Fuld Health Trust Simulation Center with state-of-the-art technology. The
simulation center allows nursing students to practice real-world clinical scenarios. This year Bryant played a lead
role in the school's response to the Covid-19 pandemic. She used simulation training to redeploy nurses in the
hospital to care for Covid-19 patients, and she led the donation of large amounts of protective gear from the
simulation center to New York-Presbyterian Hospital. Bryant also found time to march with students in the recent
protests for racial justice.

JOHN CARDASIS, MD Director, critical care White Plains Hospital

Dr. John Cardasis helped lead White Plains Hospital through the proverbial eye of the storm during New York's
Covis-19 outbreak. He expanded the hospital's intensive care unit capacity by some 500% and created new ICUs
that housed more than 200 critically ill Covid-19 patients. Known for his calm leadership style, Cardasis rapidly
recruited and trained new ICU providers, taking on primary care duties himself. He created a team of orthopedic
and thoracic surgeons to help wean Covid-19 patients off respirators by turning them on their stomachs, a
technique known as proning. Cardasis is credited with helping the Westchester County hospital successfully treat
more than 800 Covid-19 patients.

BRENDAN CARR, MD Chair of emergency medicine Mount Sinai Health System and Ichan School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai

Dr. Brendan Carr joined Mount Sinai in February, about a month before the first Covid-19 case was diagnosed in
New York City. He may have been new to his job by the time the city's Covid-19 outbreak was in full swing, but he

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

played a central role in the sprawling health system's response to the crisis. Carr spent his days at Mount Sinai's
eight hospitals, ensuring Covid-19 patients were safely transported throughout the system to alleviate pressure on
Mount Sinai's hard-hit community hospitals in Brooklyn and Queens. In addition, he worked to shore up the
system's supply chain and expand capacity in its emergency departments by having tents built outside the
hospitals.

NATALIA CINEAS, DNP, RN Senior vice president and system chief nurse executive NYC Health + Hospitals

As chief nurse executive at NYC Health + Hospitals, Natalia Cineas led the country's largest public health care
system through the city's Covid-19 outbreak. After being appointed to her position in March 2019, Cineas played a
key role in crisis management. Among other initiatives, she oversaw recruitment and deployment of more than
5,000 additional nurses and nursing specialists. With her nurses on the front lines of battling the coronavirus,
Cineas helped implement emotional support and wellness programs specifically for them. She leads initiatives to
support patient-centered care and to ensure patient satisfaction as she heads a staff of more than 9,600 nurses and
970 social workers. In addition, she oversees clinical operations and nurse education. Cineas co-chairs a council
that sets systemwide strategic diversity and inclusion priorities.

JON COHEN, MD Executive chairman BioReference Laboratories Inc.

Under Dr. Jon Cohen's direction, BioReference Laboratories has become a leading provider of Covid-19 diagnostic
and antibody tests in New York and other states. Earlier this year the firm landed a $150 million contract with New
York state for analyzing Covid-19 diagnostic and antibody tests. BioReference, a subsidiary of publicly traded
OPKO Heath, has been testing samples collected at 11 drive-thru facilities around the state. It has run some 20
walk-up testing centers. Cohen's previous public-sector experience as a chief policy adviser to former Gov. David
Paterson helped the company connect quickly with the state and city to ramp up testing. In July, BioReference
signed deals to test for Covid-19 among players and staff of the National Basketball Association and Major League
Soccer.

LOUISE COHEN Chief executive officer Primary Care Development Corp

At the Primary Care Development Corp., Louise Cohen works to expand and strengthen a primary care safety net
that has been damaged by the Covid-19 crisis. PCDC provides capital and technical help to primary care providers.
In addition, the nonprofit advocates for increased primary care access, capacity, reimbursement and capital
resources. The pandemic has put many primary care practices at risk of closure, and it has exacerbated long-
standing health disparities. Under Cohen, PCDC is pushing for rapid and targeted community-level investment in
primary care. Without action, the organization expects health disparities to deepen. Cohen joined PCDC in 2015
from Public Health Solutions, where she oversaw programs to improve community health throughout the city.

LISA DEANGELIS, MD Physician-in-chief and chief medical officer Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

Dr. Lisa DeAngelis, a brain cancer expert, was named physician-in- chief and chief medical officer of Memorial
Sloan Kettering in the fall of 2019. She directs MSK's clinical effort, overseeing the care of patients at 20 facilities,
including the flagship 500-bed hospital. DeAngelis presides over the care given by more than 1,200 attending
physicians and nearly 4,000 nurses. The 30-year veteran of the hospital previously chaired its department of
neurology, and she co-founded the Brain Tumor Center. DeAngelis conducted clinical research that helped set the
standard of care for central nervous system lymphoma. She first knew she wanted to become a doctor in the third
grade. Her father encouraged her to make the most of her medical education and to commit to treating patients
regardless of their ability to pay.

BENJAMIN DE LA ROSA, MD Infectious-diseases specialist Holy Name Medical Center

Dr. Benjamin De La Rosa has served in the trenches of New Jersey's Covid-19 outbreak and survived the disease.
At Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck, De La Rosa worked long hours, caring for Covid-19 patients and
investigating new treatments and protocols. He was part of the team that treated the first American-Broadway
producer Edward Pierce-to receive a promising therapy that originated in Israel. Pierce, who had been critically ill,

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

began to improve soon after receiving the treatment. In March De La Rosa himself tested positive for Covid-19, but
he experienced only mild symptoms. After recovering at home, he returned to work and continues to help lead the
infectious-diseases and clinical research teams.

JACQUELINE DELMONT, MD Chief medical officer Somos Innovation Founder and chief executive officer Delmont
Medical Care

Dr. Jacqueline Delmont has led the charge at Somos, a nonprofit network of 2,500 independent doctors, to ramp up
Covid-19 testing in underserved communities across the city. The native of Venezuela has worked with churches,
government officials, Latin-American consulates, first responders, hospitals and private organizations to set up
more than 50 testing sites. Covid-19 has taken a toll on low-income communities as well as the independent
doctors who serve them. Under Delmont, Somos has helped the physician practices in its network access federal
disaster relief. It encouraged them to look for inefficiencies and embrace telemedicine, among other steps to boost
competitiveness and patient access.

MIKAEL DOLSTEN, MD Chief scientific officer and president, worldwide research, development and medical Pfizer

Dr. Mikael Dolsten is charged with advancing Pfizer's scientific leadership in vaccines and gene therapies, among
other areas-no small task under ordinary cir- cumstances, let alone during a global pandemic. Recognizing the
need for collective action, Dolsten readily agreed earlier this year to have Pfizer participate in an unprecedented
public-private partnership to prioritize vaccine and drug candidates, streamline clinical trials and coordinate
regulatory processes. Under Dolsten, Pfizer's aggressive, multipronged approach to developing a Covid-19 vaccine
appears to be yielding results. In July the pharmaceutical giant began the last stage of an experimental Covid-19
vaccine study that is expected to enroll 30,000 people. The company aims to file for regulatory approval or
emergency-use authorization in October.

MICHELE DONATO, MD Chief of stem cell transplantation and cellular therapy John Theurer Cancer Center
Hackensack University Medical Center

Dr. Michele Donato is in a self-described race against time to develop a treatment for the sickest Covid-19 patients.
Donato is helping to lead a team of researchers and clinical experts at Hackensack University Med- ical Center that
is scrutinizing the blood of recovered Covid-19 patients to discover more about the disease and develop new ways
to fight it. Scientists from Hackensack Meridian Health Center for Discovery and Innovation also are involved in the
research into a convalescent- plasma treatment for the corona- virus. The study, announced in April, is one of
several such clinical trials underway. Convalescent plasma treatments have been used to fight past viral outbreaks.
They entail infusing the antibody-rich blood of recovered patients into infected patients.

AMY DORIN President and chief executive officer The Coalition for Behavioral Health

Amy Dorin is helping the city's behavioral health community get back on its feet in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis.
Dorin is among the industry leaders and public officials calling for more support for behavioral health providers who
face lower revenue and higher costs because of the pandemic. At the same time New Yorkers are under stress
from coping with the coronavirus and its economic impact, resulting in pent-up demand for mental health services.
Dorin's organization provides advocacy, training and other support for community-based behavioral health
providers, many of them new to teletherapy. It recently launched a business recovery initiative to help its members
develop strategies for sustainability.

MICHAEL DOWLING President and chief executive officer Northwell Health

Northwell Health, New York's largest health care provider, has treated more Covid-19 patients-upward of 50,000-
than any other organization in the country. Company CEO Michael Dowling has likened the experience to going to
war. Indeed, he led Northwell through numerous battles, from creating hundreds of beds each day to securing
protective gear for thousands of workers during New York's recent surge. Dowling helped lead New York's hospital
community through the crisis, co-chairing a council to oversee hospitals' efforts to boost their capacity by thousands

                                                                                                         Page 7 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

of beds. The thought leader has used his platform to take a stand on gun violence and other tough social issues,
including a call for national unity against the pandemic.

JASON FELDMAN Co-founder and chief executive officer Vault Health

After noticing that many of his male friends were reluctant to seek care for certain issues, Jason Feldman co-
founded Vault Health in 2018 to provide specialized, at-home care for men. Some men may be shy about seeking
medical help, but Feldman's startup is getting some attention. Earlier this year it raised $30 million to expand its
reach. The company's services include personalized treatment plans for sexual health, hair loss, prescriptions,
house calls from providers and telemedicine services. In May, the company took its at-home proposition to a new
level, announcing plans to offer a federally approved, at-home saliva test kit for Covid-19. Before launching Vault
Health, Feldman was the head of Amazon Prime Video Direct.

MARKI FLANNERY President and chief executive officer Visiting Nurse Service of New York

Marki Flannery, a 38-year veteran of the Visiting Nurse Service of New York, has been CEO of the huge nonprofit
home-care agency since 2018. In her various roles, she's helped the organization become one of the country's
largest nonprofit home- and community-based health care providers. During the Covid-19 outbreak, Flannery
transitioned thousands of employees to remote work in short order. She helped procure more than $5 million in
protective gear and other supplies, among other initiatives. By providing uninterrupted care, VNSNY helped ease
the burden on hospitals. Under a transition plan, Flannery will turn the organization's reins over to its chief financial
officer, Dan Savitt, early next year.

ROBERT FORONJY, MD Chief of pulmonary and critical care SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University

Dr. Robert Foronjy helped care for some of the hardest-hit communities in the city's Covid-19 outbreak, and he did
so under less-than-ideal conditions. University Hospital was one of three city facilities directed by Gov. Andrew
Cuomo to treat only Covid-19 patients. The 376-bed hospital is publicly funded and has been described in news
reports as under-resourced and aging. Many of its patients are poor and people of color and hail from
neighborhoods with relatively high rates of chronic diseases. Despite worries about his own health and the state of
his hospital's aging facilities, Foronjy cared for an avalanche of Covid-19 patients. He has said the episode
highlighted the city's health care disparities.

OREN FRANK Cofounder and chief executive officer Talkspace

The coronavirus pandemic is pushing more Americans to access health care remotely. Talkspace, founded in 2012
by Oren Frank and his wife, Roni, already has proven that therapy is well-suited to virtual care. The Manhattan
digital mental-health platform connects people to licensed therapists through a mobile application. In May,
Talkspace announced an agreement with Cigna that brought to 40 million the number of insured individuals who are
covered for its services. Talkspace already was growing quickly before the pandemic hit. In May 2019 it raised $50
million to expand its national network. This past May, the company reported that insurance coverage for Talkspace
had increased fivefold year-over-year. Olympian Michael Phelps is both an investor and a spokesman.

LINDA FRIED, MD Dean Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health

The role of public-health experts has never been more important or under greater attack. Dr. Linda Fried leads one
of the country's major public-health schools and has engineered a strong response to Covid-19 on multiple fronts.
In addition to the traditional research role of public health, the school's experts are shaping government responses
and contingency planning. They've served as media sources and mobilized critical volunteer efforts. Fried, an
authority in geriatric medicine, is part of a team of experts on aging that's tracking how people are coping with the
pandemic. The findings of this global study could help governments and policymakers address the pandemic's
mental-health consequences. Social distancing and other containment measures may give rise to unprecedented
levels of loneliness and social isolation, particularly among the elderly.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
                                          NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

JAMES GASPERINO, MD Chair, medicine; vice president, critical care perioperative and hospital medicine;
associate chief medical officer Brooklyn Hospital Center

Brooklyn Hospital Center, a 450-bed, acute-care hospital in Downtown Brooklyn, was hit hard by the Covid-19
outbreak. Many of its doctors and nurses were sickened during the outbreak. The hospital ran out of critical
supplies, from protective gowns to the main sedative for patients on ventilators. Under the leadership of Dr. James
Gasperino, the hospital dealt with the flood of patients to its emergency department by building an outdoor tent to
screen people for Covid-19. It redeployed health care workers from departments that had cut back on services,
among other emergency measures. In 2017 Gasperino transformed critical-care medicine at Brooklyn Hospital by
hiring new faculty, redesigning critical operations and adding a fellowship program in critical care.

ROSA GIL Founder, president and chief executive officer Comunilife

Earlier this year, Rosa Gil's housing nonprofit, Comunilife, stepped up to provide what she called "the last leg of
recuperation" for the city's homeless Covid-19 patients. Comunilife worked with New York-Presbyterian and Mount
Sinai hospitals to expand its medical respite program. It established an 84-bed facility in Manhattan to provide
short-term housing for Covid-19 patients who had been discharged from the hospitals and needed a safe place to
quarantine while recovering. Gil has had a long and distinguished career in the city's health, mental health,
supportive housing, social service and higher education sectors. Among other roles, she chaired NYC Health +
Hospitals and served as a health policy adviser to former Mayor Rudy Giuliani.

JASON GOREVIC Chief executive officer Teladoc Health

A pandemic is an ideal time to specialize in telehealth services. In the first quarter, Teladoc's revenues climbed
41% compared to the year-earlier period, to more than $180 million. Total visits rose 92% to 2 million. Teladoc is
poised for growth as virtual care becomes a necessity for all health care providers. Driven by a passion for
improving health care outcomes and access, Jason Gorevic has helped to turn Teladoc into a telemedicine
powerhouse since he took over its reins in 2009. With more than 3 million members, the Purchase-based publicly
traded company provides access to affordable care through videoconferencing and telephone consultations with
board-certified physicians. Teladoc is expected to become an even-larger player in telemedicine when its planned
merger with Livongo Health, a provider of digital health management for chronic conditions, closes later this year.

SCOTT HAYWORTH, MD President and chief executive officer CareMount Medical

With many patients putting off preventative services and screenings during the pandemic, health care leaders
worry that there's another crisis in the making. Telehealth is one way to give patients access to care. Under Dr.
Scott Hayworth, CareMount Medical performed 1,500 telehealth visits a day during the peak of the Covid-19
outbreak compared with the typical six telehealth visits a day. CareMount, one of the country's largest independent
multispecialty groups, expects usage to remain high after the pandemic. Hayworth, an obstetrics and gynecology
specialist who started practicing medicine at CareMount in 1988, oversaw a major expansion of the medical group.
It grew from 40 physicians to 650 providers, including 500 doctors in the Hudson Valley and New York City.

DAVID HO, MD Founding scientific director and chief executive officer, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center
Professor of medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons

Dr. David Ho made a name for himself decades ago with his pioneering HIV research, which led him to advocate for
a therapy that has dramatically reduced AIDS deaths. More than 10 million patients have benefited from
combination antiretroviral therapy since the mid-1990s. Ho is now leading research teams that are applying lessons
learned from decades of HIV research to fighting the novel coronavirus. Ho's team has isolated antibodies from
several Covid-19 patients that are potent in neutralizing the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Such antibodies could be produced
in large quantities to treat patients and prevent infection. Recently the foundation founded by Jack Ma of Alibaba
fame gave Ho and his research teams $2.1 million to support their efforts.

KATHERINE HOCHMAN, MD Associate professor, New York University Grossman School of Medicine Associate
chair for quality of care, director of hospitalist program, NYU Langone Health-Tish Hospital

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

Even while quarantined, Dr. Katherine Hochman helped lead NYU Langone's response to the Covid-19 crisis. She
created a "Covid Army" by redeploying more than 850 doctors, front-line staff and even medical students to provide
support. Through daily Covid-19 update emails, often dotting clinical care policy updates with personal reflections or
anecdotes, Hochman kept personnel updated and spirits high. When Covid-19 patients were in isolation and
separated from friends and family, she implemented the Family Connect program to enhance communications.
Many health systems restricted visitors to reduce the spread of infections. By reviewing charts and consulting with
care teams, Family Connect teams monitored the progress of Covid-19 patients and regularly updated their families
through phone calls and videoconferences.

CAROL HOROWITZ, MD Professor of population health science and policy Professor of medicine, and dean for
gender equity in science and medicine at Icahn school of medicine at Mount Sinai

Dr. Carol Horowitz, a professor, researcher and practicing internist, leads a fledgling research initiative at Mount
Sinai that seeks to understand and combat health disparities in underserved communities. Horowitz directs the
Institute for Health Equity Research, announced in May. The Covid-19 pandemic has had a disproportionate impact
on nonwhite, low-income and immigrant communities, underscoring the need for research on health disparities and
initiatives that shaped the findings. Earvin "Magic" Johnson and state Sen. Brian Benjamin are in a task force
helping to steer and publicize the institute's research. In addition, Horowitz leads Mount Sinai's gender equity efforts
to correct inequities in compensation, hiring and promotion, and eliminate bias.

KAREN IGNAGNI President and chief executive officer EmblemHealth

Karen Ignagni took the reins of EmblemHealth in 2015 and has since worked to improve the experience of its more
than 3 million members and expand its regional reach. As head of one of the largest nonprofit health insurers, she
has been outspoken about the need to restore federal funding for public health and address disparities in health
care. With the Covid-19 crisis accelerating the use of telehealth, a recent study from EmblemHealth shined a light
on the link between access to technology in lower-income communities and health care disparities. Ignagni says
the crisis illuminates the need for both quality home care and the full integration of behavioral health and acute
care. Ignagni previously led the trade group America's Health Insurance Plans. In that role she helped shape the
Affordable Care Act.

LETITIA 'TISH' JAMES Attorney general, New York state Former public advocate, New York City

Letitia James has demonstrated a fierce commitment to public health throughout her career in public service-from
fighting for access to women's reproductive health care to pressing for measures to protect the public from gun
violence and ensuring access to health insurance. She is the first woman of color to hold statewide office in New
York and the first woman to be elected state attorney general. In January she led a coalition of Democratic
attorneys general in petitioning the U.S. Supreme Court to hear a case on the future of the Affordable Care Act. She
was part of a coalition of 16 attorneys general who supported legal action to ensure states can enact restrictions to
protect against gun violence.

WALTER JIN Chairman and chief executive officer Pager

Walter Jin, who has overseen more than $5 billion in investments in the health care sector during his equity and
venture capital career, took over the reins of the mobile health tech firm Pager in 2017. Amid growing demand for
telehealth services, Pager raised $33 million in financing in March to expand its offering to new markets. Pager's
virtual care companion, marketed to health insurers and providers, allows patients to interact with health care
providers through chat, voice and video. Pager said the process is designed to mimic what it is like to have "a
doctor in the family" by providing a personalized, connected care experience. Since its launch in 2014, Pager has
raised some $64 million.

PAT KANE, RN Executive director New York State Nurses Association

Pat Kane, a registered nurse and longtime leader of the New York State Nurses Association, took the reins of the
union in December, just months before many of its members were hit hard by the Covid-19 outbreak. Under Kane,

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

the union, which represents 42,000 nurses, responded by advocating for protective gear and pressuring the state
Department of Health and certain hospitals to do more to protect the health and safety of nurses treating Covid-19
patients. Kane, a former operating-room nurse, joined the union in 1986 and became its treasurer in 2012, a
position she held until last year. During her tenure, she's helped steer the union toward successful contract
campaigns and focused on safe staffing, climate justice and guaranteed universal health care.

OLIVER KHARRAZ, MD Founder and chief executive officer Zocdoc

By this own account, Dr. Oliver Kharraz comes from a line of doctors dating back 300 years. Now he's making a
name for Zocdoc by bringing some aspects of medicine into the modern age. Kharraz, a former McKinsey
consultant, co-founded Zocdoc, an online, medical appointment-booking platform, to make it easier and faster for
consumers to find nearby doctors and schedule visits. With a growing demand for telehealth, the company added
an option for doctors to offer video visits. Some 8,000 providers initially signed on. It rolled out a videoconferencing
service that doctors can use, for free, for telehealth visits. With its recent expansion into telehealth, Zocdoc is going
up against companies that specialize in the field as well as consumer-facing platforms, such as Skype and Zoom.

ANUJA KHEMKA Executive director Children's Hope India

As the new executive director of Children's Hope India, Anuja Khemka already has made her mark with the
nonprofit's response to Covid-19. The organization, which works to lift children in India and New York from poverty,
launched a rapid-relief program that has provided 500,000 meals, 15,000 pieces of protective gear and about 2,500
soaps, sanitizers and handwashing units to people in need. Before joining Children's Hope this year, Khemka was
executive director at The Steve Fund, where she forged partnerships with universities to create more culturally
sensitive campus environments. In addition to overseeing Children's Hope, Khemka is a Forbes contributor. She is
developing a book series to help children build self-esteem and greater resilience.

ERIC KINARIWALA Founder and chief executive officer Capsule

The coronavirus pandemic has taken a human and economic toll, but it's also benefited certain businesses. Count
Capsule among them. As Americans hunker down, they've become less inclined to venture out to brick-and-mortar
pharmacies. Capsule is an app-based pharmacy offering free, same-day delivery. It has attracted new customers
and seen sales among existing customers rise because of Covid-19. Eric Kinariwala, a former investment analyst,
launched Capsule in 2015 after a self-described miserable drugstore experience. The company was already seeing
robust growth before the pandemic. In 2018 its revenue and its customer count more than tripled. In all, the firm has
raised more than $250 million in venture capital to fund its expansion.

RANDY KLEIN Chief executive officer Vesta Healthcare

During the city's Covid-19 outbreak, Vesta seized an opportunity to prove its value and make a difference. Led by
veteran health care executive Randy Klein, the tech and clinical-services firm connects patients and caregivers to
the rest of the care team through telehealth and other resources. The startup recently entered into a partnership
with JASA, a home-care agency, to support thousands of vulnerable New Yorkers. JASA is a nonprofit that serves
more than 40,000 older adults. Vesta is giving its digital tools and clinical program, including a Covid-19-specific
module, to JASA clients and their caregivers for free. The platform is designed to serve as an early warning system
that helps prevent unnecessary hospitalizations. It addresses social isolation, among other issues.

MARIELLE KRESS Executive director NYC Care

Marielle Kress, a native New Yorker, returned home last year from Washington, D.C., to take a job that would allow
her to give back to her hometown. Little did she know just how much her help would be needed. Kress has spent
about a year managing the rollout of Mayor Bill de Blasio's $100 million care access program. NYC Care
guarantees low- and no-cost care through NYC Health + Hospitals to New Yorkers who don't qualify for or can't
afford health insurance. It has enrolled more than 25,000 people in a city that until recently was the epicenter of the
Covid-19 crisis. Thousands more are expected to enroll in the program when it expands to Manhattan and Queens
in September.

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

SETH LEDERMAN, MD Cofounder, chief executive officer and chairman Tonix Pharmaceuticals

In the race to develop a novel coronavirus vaccine, publicly traded biopharma firm Tonix is collaborating with the
nonprofit Southern Research of Alabama to develop a live, replicating-virus vaccine intended to confer long-term
immunity. The vaccine candidate is based on a virus that Dr. Seth Lederman thinks is closely related to the first
smallpox vaccine developed by the pioneering English physician Edward Jenner. In July Tonix announced a
research collaboration with Columbia University focused on studying the immune responses to Covid-19 in people
who recovered from it or were asymptomatic. The research collaboration will focus on T-cell and antibody
responses to the virus at the cellular level. Lederman founded cancer-drug developer Targent Pharmaceuticals.

BENJAMINE LIU Co-founder and chief executive officer TrialSpark

While doing graduate work as a Rhodes scholar, Benjamine Liu first noticed that the traditional process of designing
and conducting clinical trials often creates bottlenecks. That realization motivated him to cofound TrialSpark in
2013. The tech firm is shaking up the world of clinical trials and drug development, just in time to fight the
coronavirus pandemic. TrialSpark partners with doctors to create trial sites within their practices, which the
company says boosts participant recruitment rates and patient access to clinical trials. TrialSpark is part of an effort,
supported by tech investor Sam Altman, to speed up Covid-19 research. The project's first study enrolled 500
patients just 10 days after its launch in July.

THERESA MADALINE, MD Health care epidemiologist Montefiore Health System

As a key player in Montefiore Health System's response to Covid-19, Dr. Theresa Madaline helped manage a
surge of patients and implemented protocols to protect staff from infection. Madaline has been Montefiore's trusted
voice on Covid-19, acting as a media source and sharing critical public health messages. She has been on the
front lines of outbreaks before. In 2019 she helped oversee Montefiore's response to a nationwide measles
outbreak. Her work on that front has guided other health care institutions. She's also has driven improvements
across Montefiore, a system that serves more than 3 million people in the Bronx and the Hudson Valley. Last year
Modern Healthcare named her to its Top 25 Emerging Leaders list.

CAROLYN MAGILL Chief executive officer Aetion

As CEO of Aetion, Carolyn Magill delivers real-world analytics and evidence needed to inform critical health care
decisions-which treatments work best, for whom and when. The company's mission is even more urgent in the
Covid-19 era. Aetion landed a research-collaboration agreement in May with the Food and Drug Administration to
use real-world data to advance the understanding of Covid-19 and the response to the disease. The research
supports FDA efforts to understand the natural history of the disease and diagnostic and treatment patterns. Real-
time data can include medical and pharmacy claims, lab test results and electronic medical record information.
Magill's 20 years of leadership experience in health care has focused on the shift from fee-for-service to value-
based care.

SAMIR MALIK Executive vice president and general manager Genoa Telepsychiatry

Samir Malik has spent much of his career breaking down barriers to mental health care. In 2011 he co-founded
1DocWay, a telepsychiatry network operator. Telepsychiatry has helped alleviate the imbalance between growing
demand for mental health services and the number of mental health professionals. Amid the Covid-19 pandemic,
many community mental health centers are relying heavily on telemedicine. Malik's 1DocWay was acquired by
Genoa Healthcare in 2015 and became its telepsychiatry platform. In 2018 UnitedHealth Group acquired Genoa
Healthcare for some $2.5 billion. Under Malik, Genoa Telepsychiatry has become a leader in its field. In the past
year, the platform has provided 250,000 visits, connecting 330 providers to behavioral health centers in more than
30 states.

JOHN MARSHALL, MD Chair, emergency medicine Maimonides Medical Center

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

Long before the pandemic, Dr. John Marshall had triaged more than a few disaster victims. During his residency in
emergency medicine, he treated victims of the Columbine High School shooting. While serving in the Air Force, he
tended to military personnel in war-torn Afghanistan. But New York's Covid-19 outbreak was like nothing he had
ever seen. Borough Park, home to the 711-bed Maimonides Medical center, was swamped with cases. Marshall led
the hospital's emergency management team through uncharted waters. Drawing on the experiences of doctors in
Italy and elsewhere, he and his team created best practices in real time. During the height of the outbreak, he
shared his team's findings on the use of ventilators with a U.S. Senate subcommittee.

KONSTANTIN MEHL Co-founder and chief executive officer Kaia Health

Getting physical therapy for chronic back pain can be, well, a pain. Now, there's an app for that. Konstantin Mehl, a
self-described serial entrepreneur, co-founded Kaia Health, a digital therapeutic company, in 2016 after years of
struggling to manage chronic back pain. The firm's app-based, mind-body therapies are used to treat back pain,
knee and hip osteoarthritis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The app works with a smartphone camera
to give users audio feedback as they perform exercises. The Brooklyn company has raised $50 million in venture
capital since its launch. With many medical offices temporarily closed as a result of Covid-19, Kaia Health has seen
an uptick in demand for digital-health services, particularly among high-risk COPD patients.

PARVEZ MIR, MD Director of pulmonary and critical care Wyckoff Heights Medical Center

New York state's first reported Covid-19 death took place at Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, where Dr. Parvez Mir
has practiced for more than two decades. The 350-bed hospital on the border of Brooklyn and Queens would
eventually treat more than 2,000 Covid-19 patients. Hundreds died, as did staff. Many refused to come to work, but
not Mir, who at one point worked for six weeks without a day off. With staff in short supply, he recruited a
pulmonologist from Arkansas. He turned to the blogs of doctors abroad for insight into treating Covid-19. As the
crisis unfolded, Mir told Time magazine that caring for Covid-19 patients is a way to practice living his Muslim faith.

CHERYL MOORE President and COO New York Genome Center

Cheryl Moore has been a driving force behind the New York Genome Center's decision to take on the coronavirus
pandemic. Together with Chief Executive Officer Tom Maniatis, she sets the strategic direction of the nonprofit
research institution, which seeks to better understand the genetic basis of cancer and other diseases. Earlier this
year the center expanded its research to include the study of the genomics underlying the novel coronavirus and
Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus. Its Covid-19 Genomics Research Network, a consortium of 250
scientists and clinicians, is seeking answers to such critical questions as how the coronavirus spreads, and why
some infected people have only mild symptoms and others become critically ill.

MARK MULLIGAN, MD Director, division of infectious diseases and immunology and the Vaccine Center NYU
Langone Health

Dr. Mark Mulligan, a physician-scientist who has studied some of the world's deadliest viruses, has expanded his
focus to the novel coronavirus. Mulligan leads NYU Langone's Vaccine Center, which earlier this year was one of
the first U.S. centers to enroll patients in a clinical trial of Covid-19 vaccine candidates developed by Pfizer and
Germany's BioNTech. The lead vaccine candidate to emerge from the trial has now entered its final phase of study.
That research is taking place at NYU Langone's Vaccine Center and more than 100 other sites worldwide. NYU
Langone was selected for the trial partly because of the expertise of Mulligan, whose infectious-disease research
programs have produced vaccine candidates for HIV and other viruses.

ALAN MURRAY President and chief executive officer Empire BlueCross BlueShield

Alan Murray joined Empire BlueCross BlueShield in 2018 and this year led New York's largest health insurer
through the Covid-19 outbreak. With the pandemic greatly restricting patients' ability to see their doctors, Murray
has worked to expand access to telemedicine for Empire's roughly 4 million members. Empire, for instance,
recently reached an agreement with CityMD to give members access to the urgent care provider's doctors in New
York through LiveHealth Online, Empire's telemedicine platform. Before joining Empire, Murray led Northwell

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

Health's CareConnect, the state's first provider-owned commercial insurance plan. Murray, a native of Scotland and
a former British Merchant Navy officer, has held senior roles in the New York area at United Healthcare and
Anthem.

MONSIGNOR GREGORY MUSTACIUOLO Chief executive officer Mother Cabrini Health Foundation

Monsignor Gregory Mustaciuolo is the first CEO of the Mother Cabrini Health Foundation. The mammoth
organization launched in 2018 from the proceeds of the Roman Catholic Church's nearly $3.8 billion sale of its
nonprofit health plan, Fidelis Care, to publicly traded Centene Corp. The $3.2 billion foundation, among the largest
in the country, focuses on increasing access to health care in underserved communities across New York state. In
early March the foundation announced inaugural grants of nearly $150 million to fund more than 500 programs and
initiatives that work to improve the health and quality of life for low-income and underserved communities. That
same month, the foundation announced an additional $50 million in emergency funding to support nonprofits
addressing the health needs of New Yorkers affected by Covid-19.

FLORIAN OTTO, MD Co-founder and chief executive officer Cedar

Florian Otto, an entrepreneur and former physician, co-founded Cedar in 2016 after what he describes as a terrible
medical billing experience. The company helps health care providers bring greater convenience, transparency and
personalization to medical billing, ideally resulting in higher collection rates and greater patient satisfaction. Cedar
now serves some of the city's largest providers. In June it announced $102 million in funding, bringing total capital
raised to $157 million. It plans to use the money to attract new clients and expand its product beyond billing and
collection to new areas, such as appointment reminders and digital-registration forms. That strategy will move
Cedar beyond patient billing to what Otto calls a "comprehensive health care consumer engagement platform."

PHILIP OZUAH, MD President and chief executive officer Montefiore Medicine

Dr. Philip Ozuah, who joined Montefiore Medicine as a pediatric intern and resident in 1989, succeeded
Montefiore's retired leader, Dr. Steven Safyer, in November 2019. Ozuah has held a number of leadership positions
at Montefiore Medicine, which includes the Montefiore Health System and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Ozuah is credited with expanding access for underserved communities, recruiting top talent and fostering medical
education innovation, among other achievements. He has used his platform during the pandemic to highlight health
care inequities and Montefiore's efforts to make a difference. "I find it maddening that individuals who live within
blocks of my hospital are made more vulnerable by their physical and social environments," he wrote in a recent
editorial.

LORENZO PALADINO, MD Associate professor, emergency medicine SUNY Downstate and Kings County Medical
Center

Dr. Lorenzo Paladino has served on the front lines of earthquakes and other disasters abroad. This year he found
himself on the front lines of a crisis in his hometown. Paladino's role in the crisis wasn't limited to caring for Covid-
19 patients. Because of his earlier research on ventilators, he was part of a White House task force that established
protocols for how to put multiple patients on ventilators designed for single-patient use. New York was facing the
grim prospect of running out of the machines, leading hospitals to contemplate such drastic measures. In addition,
Paladino is a flight surgeon in the New York Air National Guard's 106th Rescue Wing.

ARTEM PETAKOV Cofounder and president Noom

Artem Petakov's weight-loss app Noom is almost a household name. But it wasn't an overnight success. Petakov,
who discovered his passion for programming at age 9, cofounded Noom with his best friend, Saeju Jeong, in 2008.
Petakov said the two made every startup mistake imaginable, spent years refining Noom and, more than once,
nearly ran out of money. In 2016 they found the right market fit for the app. Last year Noom generated $237 million
in revenue (the bulk of it from users of the app), up from $61 million in 2018 and $12 million in 2017. More people
may turn to Noom this year to fight the weight gain so common it's been dubbed the "Quarantine 15."

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

ALEXANDER POLLAK Chief executive officer ParaDocs Worldwide Inc.

Alexander Pollak is no stranger to the pivot. Early in his career, he left a high-paying finance job to work in
medicine. The entrepreneur and paramedic launched ParaDocs in 2011, and it soon became a leading provider of
on-site medical treatment at music festivals, among other big events. When the Covid-19 pandemic struck New
York, he turned his company on a dime. Rather than staffing big events, the firm's paramedics and emergency
medical technicians staffed ambulances. Some of its doctors worked in hospitals. ParaDocs handled employee
health screenings to help keep essential businesses and services open. Today ParaDocs is running testing sites,
health screenings and temperature checks at construction sites and office buildings. In addition, it provides on-site
medical care and Covid-19 compliance work for film productions and fashion shows.

DAVID V. POMERANZ Chief operating officer Hebrew Home at Riverdale by RiverSpring Health

Nursing home residents have been devastated by Covid-19, as have the workers who care for them. At Hebrew
Home at Riverdale in the Bronx, keeping workers and residents safe and emotionally grounded while complying
with government mandates falls to David Pomeranz. Since May, the Hebrew Home has been testing its 1,000
employees for Covid-19 every week at an estimated cost of $600,000 a month. To tackle that task, Hebrew Home
repurposed its own nursing staff, secured testing supplies and partnered with New York-Presbyterian to expedite
the test processing. Pomeranz made headlines by championing a new program that uses a drive-in movie model to
allow residents to visit with family from a safe distance. Visitors stay in their parked cars and communicate through
a wireless speaker with loved ones visible in an enclosed vestibule.

CLAIRE POMEROY, MD President Lasker Foundation

Dr. Claire Pomeroy, an expert in infectious diseases, is a longtime public health advocate, with a focus on patients
with HIV and AIDS. As head of the Lasker Foundation since 2013, Pomeroy is responsible for advancing the
group's mission to "improve health by accelerating support for medical research through recognition of research
excellence, education and advocacy." She passionately supports continued investment in medical research and
has an interest in health care policy and the importance of the social determinants of health. Throughout the
pandemic, Pomeroy has served as a media source. She has framed the crisis as an opportunity to gain medical
research insight to help form a response to the pandemic and prepare society for future outbreaks of disease.

JULIA RAMIREZ Community outreach manager Immigrant Health and Cancer Disparities Service Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center

The pandemic has exacerbated health care disparities. For Julia Ramirez, these disparities have been the heart of
her career. Ramirez runs Memorial Sloan Kettering programs, including a hospital-based food pantry initiative, that
help eliminate disparities in health and cancer treatment among underserved patients. Her Food to Overcome
Outcomes Disparities program is a lifeline for many New Yorkers. The Covid-19 crisis worsened food insecurity and
made many cancer patients fearful of leaving their homes. Ramirez responded by rolling out a delivery service. She
enlisted the help of redeployed MSK jitney drivers, food-delivery companies and even laid-off cabdrivers. In recent
months the Food program has delivered nearly 20,000 meals to more than 400 cancer patients.

RAM RAJU, MD Former senior vice president and community health investment officer Northwell Health

The pandemic has created a sense of greater urgency when it comes to tackling health care disparities. But Dr.
Ram Raju has long been on the front lines of the fight for greater equity. Raju spent the past several years working
to better understand the needs of Northwell's most-vulnerable communities and finding ways to meet those needs.
Before joining Northwell, he was the president and CEO of NYC Health + Hospitals, the country's largest public
health system and a major safety-net provider. He was tapped for the position at Northwell, New York's largest
health care provider, because of his leadership experience, dedication to caring for vulnerable communities and
deep understanding of the state's health care system. Raju recently retired.

KENNETH RASKE President Greater New York Hospital Association

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

As health care workers toiled on the front lines of the city's Covid-19 outbreak, Kenneth Raske and his colleagues
at the Greater New York Hospital Association worked behind the scenes to juggle hospitals' response to the crisis
and shore up their finances. As president of the trade group since 1984, Raske is the direct liaison between
hospitals and state officials. He recently co-led a group to oversee hospital efforts to expand their capacity by
thousands of beds in response to an order by Gov. Andrew Cuomo. He oversaw efforts to help hospitals deal with
huge financial hits because of higher labor and equipment costs and suspended elective procedures. The
association's aggressive lobbying campaign helped hospitals land $5 billion in federal Covid-19 funding in May.

ZACHARIAH REITANO Cofounder and chief executive officer Ro

Motivated by his own health care struggles, Zachariah Reitano, a former entrepreneur-in-residence at venture
capital firm Prehype, cofounded the online pharmacy and telemedicine startup Ro in 2017. Among the most well-
capitalized firms in the health-tech sector, Ro has since raised $376 million in funding. It is among the companies
that have recently taken a strong public stand in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. In early June, Ro
posted a Twitter statement in support of Black Lives Matter that told followers "if you disagree with this statement or
feel it's in any way controversial, don't use our services and unfollow us."

DARA RICHARDSON-HERON, MD Chief patient officer Pfizer Inc.

Dr. Dara Richardson-Heron has dedicated her career to reducing health care disparities and improving patient
outcomes. As chief patient officer, Richardson-Heron leads Pfizer's efforts to advance patient-focused programs
and platforms. Before joining Pfizer in February, she was the chief engagement officer and scientific executive for
the National Institutes of Health's All of Us research program. With the goal of improving the prevention and
treatment of diseases, she led outreach efforts from 2017 to this year to enroll and retain more than a million
volunteers to share their health data. Her other leadership roles include CEO of YWCA USA, CEO of the Greater
New York City Affiliate of Susan G. Komen for the Cure and national chief medical officer for the United Cerebral
Palsy Association.

NAVARRA RODRIGUEZ, MD President and chief medical officer AdvantageCare Physicians

Under Dr. Navarra Rodriguez's guidance, AdvantageCare Physicians has helped bring New York's once-
skyrocketing Covid-19 infection rate under control. Rodriguez, who has been in her position since 2016, oversees
medical leadership and health improvement activities at AdvantageCare, one of the largest primary and specialty
care practices in the metropolitan area. In May she brokered partnerships with New York City and the state that led
to the opening of more than 20 Covid-19 testing sites at the network's community-based medical offices in low-
income areas. In addition to ramping up the city's Covid-19 testing in hard-hit neighborhoods, AdvantageCare
helped alleviate the strain on hospitals by offering telehealth services and patient referrals to Cityblock and
EmblemHealth Neighborhood Care, among other partners.

RAMON RODRIGUEZ President and chief executive officer Wyckoff Heights Medical Center

If New York had a ground zero for the pandemic, it might be Wyckoff Heights Medical Center. The community
hospital had the state's first reported Covid-19 death and went on to treat 2,000 Covid-19 patients. Ramon
Rodriguez led the overburdened hospital through the crisis. While other hospital executives scrambled for protective
gear and ventilators, Wyckoff was mostly short on staff. Out of fear and exhaustion, some employees stopped
showing up. Many workers became infected. Today Rodriguez is working to put Wyckoff-which, like other hospitals,
saw revenues decline as a result of the outbreak-back on firm financial footing. Rodriguez joined Wyckoff in 2011
with a promise to improve the hospital's patient care and fiscal stability.

KATE RYDER Founder and chief executive officer Maven

After stints in venture capital and business journalism, Kate Ryder became an entrepreneur in 2014 with a mission
to transform health care for women and their families. Ryder founded Maven, which offers virtual care and health
services in fertility, maternity care and pediatrics, among other areas. Maven aims to help employers and health
plans achieve improved maternal outcomes and lower costs while attracting and retaining more working parents.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

The company has raised more than $87 million from investors, among them Sequoia Capital, Oak HC/FT and Icon
Ventures. Before founding Maven, Ryder wrote for The Economist from Southeast Asia, New York and London, and
for the New Yorker. In 2009, she helped the former U.S. Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson write his memoirs about
the financial crisis.

DAVID SANDMAN President and chief executive officer New York State Health Foundation

David Sandman, a public-health thought leader, has overseen the New York State Health Foundation since 2016.
The private foundation works to improve the health of New Yorkers, especially its most vulnerable residents. Earlier
this year it committed $5 million to support the Covid-19 response and relief efforts in New York state. Since 2006,
the foundation has invested more than $150 million in health care initiatives. It has helped millions of New Yorkers
gain health insurance with its support of the Affordable Care Act and the Essential Plan, an optional benefit for
insuring lower-income people ineligible for Medicaid. Sandman was drawn to the field of public health during the
AIDS/HIV crisis of the 1980s and early 1990s. His career in health care has been "bookended" by AIDS/HIV and
Covid-19.

BARBARA SAMPSON Chief medical examiner City of New York

Dr. Barbara Sampson, a forensic pathologist, is the city's first female chief medical examiner. She also will go down
in history as a pivotal player in its response to its worst mass casualty since the 1918 flu pandemic. Borrowing from
its 9/11 playbook, her office mounted a Herculean effort to deal with the surge of Covid-19 deaths that overwhelmed
hospital morgues and funeral homes. Her office set up four temporary morgue sites throughout the city and sent
more than 100 refrigerated trucks to hospitals. The office, with National Guard reinforcement, dramatically scaled
up its ability to investigate deaths and respond to at-home deaths. It credits stringent safety measures for keeping
infections among its staff to a small number.

CHARLES SCHLEIEN, MD Senior vice president of Cohen Children's Medical Center & Pediatric Services Chair of
the Department of Pediatrics at the Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell Health

Dr. Charles Schleien has experienced the coronavirus pandemic from two sides: as a doctor on the front lines and
as a Covid-19 patient. While helping to plan Northwell Health's response to the pandemic, Schleien was diagnosed
with Covid-19 and struggled for 12 days at home before he was admitted to North Shore University Hospital.
Schleien recovered and returned to his pivotal role at Cohen Children's Medical Center, part of Northwell Health,
and in April he chronicled the harrowing health experience in an op-ed for The New York Times. The pediatric
hospital has been a leader in treating children with Covid-19 and helped identify a potentially severe inflammatory
syndrome linked to the disease.

TALYA SCHWARTZ, MD President and chief executive officer MetroPlusHealth

MetroPlusHealth, owned by NYC Health + Hospitals Corp., has ranked among the top insurers in the state for
quality under the leadership of CEO Talya Schwartz. Schwartz, who rose to the top post in May 2019, has led
technology solutions that enhance access to health care and pertinent health information for its more than 500,000
members. During the Covid-19 pandemic, Schwartz rapidly initiated outreach and support efforts to serve the plan's
membership. Previously she was MetroPlusHealth's chief medical officer, leading the medical management
division. In that role, she transformed the care management program into a holistic, field-based program that
tackles social determinants of health with a special focus on housing the homeless.

CHANAKA SENEVIRATNE Pulmonologist and critical care specialist Maimonides Medical Center

Dr. Chanaka Seneviratne, or "Dr. Sen" as colleagues and house staff affectionately call him, "reminds you of those
lofty reasons you went to medical school but somehow forgot in the reality that medicine is today," a former student
wrote. Senevirantne's "profound sense of dedication to patients" has inspired generations of critical care fellows to
whom he remains a mentor long after their graduation. Seneviratne, extremely knowledgeable and skilled, trains
young doctors in the intensive care unit to embrace "a lifelong enthusiasm for learning and an everlasting empathy

                                                                                                        Page 17 of 21
                                             NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

for your patient," his former student added. "Never one to push for personal accolades, he is most recognized and
valued by the people who ultimately matter most: his patients and his students.

ALLISON SESSO Executive director RIP Medical Debt

RIP Medical Debt takes aim at the nation's medical debt crisis, which is expected to worsen because of the
coronoavirus's toll on the nation's health and the economy. The nonprofit raises money to buy medical debt at a
steep discount in bundled portfolios for pennies on the dollar. It reports it has abolished $2 billion in debt so far for
1.5 million low-income families. Under Allison Sesso, who joined RIP Medical Debt in January, the nonprofit
recently launched a Helping Covid Heroes Fund that pays down medical debt owed by front-line health care
workers, emergency responders and service workers hurt by the recession. The fund has wiped out more than
$100 million in debt.

RAHUL SHARMA, MD Professor and chairman, department of emergency medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine
Emergency physician-in-chief, New York Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center

Dr. Rahul Sharma saw the promise of telemedicine long before the novel coronavirus fueled a surge in demand for
health care delivered digitally. In the past four years, he has launched several telemedicine programs at Weill
Cornell Medicine, including an initiative that allows patients whose conditions aren't life threatening to visit virtually
with an emergency-medicine doctor. By targeting patients with minor conditions who are already in the emergency
department, the program has significantly reduced wait times while maintaining patient safety and satisfaction.
Recognizing the importance of teaching virtual care skills to physicians and medical students, Sharma launched a
center within the emergency department that has trained hundreds of practitioners.

PETER SHEARER, MD Chief medical officer and vice president of medical staff Mount Sinai Brooklyn

Dr. Peter Shearer has been a leader in emergency medicine in the city for two decades. Since 2018 he has been
chief medical officer at Mount Sinai Brooklyn, which treated many Covid-19 patients. Although most recovered, the
hospital saw so many deaths that it brought in a cooler truck in case its small morgues reached capacity. Many of
its staff grew ill during the outbreak, and Shearer worries about the pandemic's impact on the mental health of
front-line workers. Throughout this experience, Shearer has bravely served the hospital and its community. He led
his team to quickly triage, treat and stabilize emergency department patients. If needed, his team facilitated safe
transfer of patients to Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.

ANTHONY SHIH, MD President United Hospital Fund

Since Dr. Anthony Shih took the helm of the United Hospital Fund in 2017, he has taken the nonprofit in new
directions. UHF focuses on improving access to quality, affordable care for all New Yorkers. Passionate about
improving health care for the underserved, Shih built clinical and community partnerships and put a greater
emphasis on the welfare of children and on diversity, equity and inclusion. Under Shih, for example, UHF has
brought national attention to children affected by the opioid crisis. In May he was appointed to one of Mayor Bill de
Blasio's councils working on a post-pandemic recovery plan. In addition, Shih is on a mayoral committee that's
focused on building a more resilient and just city.

CRAIG SPENCER, MD Director, global health in emergency medicine New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University
Medical Center

Dr. Craig Spencer was prepared for his time on the front lines of the city's Covid-19 outbreak in more ways than
one. In 2014 he became the first person in the city to be diagnosed with Ebola, a disease he contracted while caring
for Ebola patients in Guinea as a Doctors Without Borders volunteer. Even when the U.S. had just a handful of
diagnosed coronavirus infections, he was among the first public health experts to sound an alarm about the
country's lack of preparedness for a pandemic. Spencer, a board member of Doctors Without Borders, now divides
his time between providing clinical care in New York and working internationally in public health.

ADAM REED STRACHER, MD Chief medical officer, director of primary care division Weill Cornell Medicine

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

Dr. Adam Stracher was a driving force behind Weill Cornell Medicine's early adoption of telehealth. When the
Covid-19 outbreak struck the city, Weill Cornell Medicine was able to quickly scale up its capacity to offer primary
care through digital tools. Through its expanded telehealth platform, Weill Cornell Medicine offered uninterrupted
care to patients with chronic conditions and those managing Covid-19 at home, which, in turn, reduced the strain on
hospitals. Weill Cornell Medicine's digital transformation has led to a more patient-friendly and safer experience
during the pandemic. Stracher, an internal medicine physician with a specialty in infectious diseases, has said that
telemedicine will continue to play a big role at Weill Cornell and other health care institutions even after the
pandemic ends.

RAMON TALLAJ, MD Cofounder and chairman Somos Community Care

Dr. Ramon Tallaj oversees a network of more than 2,500 primary care doctors who care for hundreds of thousands
of New Yorkers in underserved communities across the city. Tallaj, a native of the Dominican Republic, has led
health care missions to the Caribbean, including a delegation of Somos doctors who cared for victims of Hurricane
Maria in remote areas of Puerto Rico. Since the start of the pandemic, Tallaj has focused on ensuring equitable
access to care, Covid-19 testing, and resources for the city's minority and immigrant communities. In June, for
instance, Somos announced a partnership with Community Organized Relief Effort, the emergency-relief nonprofit
cofounded by actor Sean Penn, to open five testing sites in marginalized communities.

ALEX TANG Clinical director Coalition of Asian-American IPA

Alex Tang directs the clinical operations of the Coalition of Asian-American IPA, an independent practice
association of more than 1,000 providers in 70 health care specialties. He spearheaded the network's rollout of
mobile Covid-19 testing sites in several low-income communities during the city's outbreak. More than 1,500 free
tests were administered at the sites, which followed safety protocols similar to those used in South Korea to reduce
the risk of accidental infection at testing facilities. Tang, a licensed physician assistant with extensive clinical
experience, led a team of physician assistants to launch the sites in Lower Manhattan, Sunset Park in Brooklyn,
and Elmhurst and Flushing, Queens, all neighborhoods with large Asian populations.

GARY TERRINONI President and chief executive officer Brooklyn Hospital Center

The Brooklyn Hospital Center is the borough's oldest hospital. This year it also became known as an epicenter of
the city's Covid-19 outbreak. The safety-net hospital captured national attention for the valiant fight it mounted
under Gary Terrinoni, who has led the hospital since 2015. Terrinoni has worked to build a culture of inclusion,
which served the hospital well during its darkest hour. Many nurses and other staff members fell ill, but the hospital
redeployed workers to keep up with the surge of Covid-19 patients. Some employees even volunteered for front-line
service. The hospital also marked some happy milestones this year. It opened a state-of-the-art physicians pavilion,
a Terrinoni initiative, and celebrated its 175th anniversary.

FLORIAN THOMAS, MD Chair, department of neurology and the Neuroscience Institute Hackensack University
Medical Center and Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine

Though physicians first classified Covid-19 as a respiratory illness, they soon recognized a range of symptoms
associated with the disease, from kidney failure to altered smell. Dr. Florian Thomas, a neurologist and researcher,
is working to understand how Covid-19 can affect the nervous system. He is in an ideal position to undertake the
research, which entails documenting neurological complaints from hospital patients and reviewing records of
discharged patients. Hackensack Meridian Health has treated thousands of Covid-19 patients, more than any other
health system in New Jersey. Thomas notes that Covid-19 can damage the heart muscle and lead to congestive
heart failure, which can bring on irregular heartbeats that trigger strokes. Covid-19 can cause inflammation that can
make the blood clot more quickly.

NANCY THORNBERRY Chief executive officer Kallyope

In 2016 Nancy Thornberry got in on the ground floor of a Manhattan biotech startup that seeks to develop drugs to
treat diseases linked to the gut-brain axis. Defects in the gut-brain axis-a two-way communication highway between

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 21
                                             NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

the stomach and the central nervous system-have been linked to obesity, diabetes, gastrointestinal disorders,
Parkinson's and other diseases. Under Thornberry, a 30-year veteran of the pharmaceutical industry, Kallyope has
made major strides in understanding the gut-brain axis and is considering its first clinical trials. In March it raised
$112 million from investors, including Bill Gates, to advance existing programs and undertake clinical trials. Its initial
focus is on drugs to treat metabolic and central nervous system disorders.

VALERIE VERMIGLIO-KOHN Vice president and chief nursing officer Burke Rehabilitation Hospital

Since joining Burke Rehabilitation Hospital in January 2019, Valerie Vermiglio-Kohn has worked to foster a culture
of trust and excellence in the nursing department and other areas of the hospital, part of the Montefiore Health
System. While she's passionate about improving patient care through evidence-based practice, Vermiglio-Kohn
also champions staff wellness. Earlier this year she was a key player in the hospital's Covid-19 response. She
helped the hospital increase its capacity to care for recovering patients on an inpatient basis to alleviate pressure
on acute-care hospitals, and she quickly established training for redeployed staff. In addition, Vermiglio-Kohn led
the implementation of rapidly changing clinical practice guidelines for infection control and care for survivors of the
coronavirus.

ANTHONY VICEROY Chief executive officer Westmed Medical Group

Westmed Medical Group is one of several large physician practices that have reshaped the medical landscape in
the New York City suburbs. Under Anthony Viceroy's direction, Westmed has played a critical role in shaping the
response to the Covid-19 pandemic in its backyard. During the outbreak earlier this year, Viceroy overcame difficult
odds to secure outpatient Covid-19 testing for the Westchester community, along with a supply of protective gear
that allowed Westmed to provide uninterrupted care. He led Westmed's telehealth expansion- rolling out virtual
access to more than 300 doctors in a matter of days-and developed a plan to keep the practice on firm financial
footing in the face of pandemic-induced disruptions.

DARREN WALKER President, Ford Foundation Chair, NYC Census 2020

As president of the Ford Foundation, a $13 billion international social justice philanthropy, Darren Walker took an
unprecedented step in June in response to the Covid-19 crisis. The foundation announced it would issue $1 billion
in 30-and 50-year taxable social bonds, applying the net proceeds to support social justice, human services, arts
and cultural organizations. "We are facing a once-in-a-century crisis, and we must respond in unprecedented ways
to sustain organizations that are advancing the fight against inequality at a time when the need is more pressing
than ever," Walker said at the time. Walker joined Ford in 2010 as vice president of education, creativity and free
expression. He became president in 2013. Previously he was president at the Rockefeller Foundation, where he
oversaw global and domestic programs.

ANDREW B. WALLACH, MD Ambulatory care chief, NYC Health + Hospitals/Bellevue Chief medical officer for
ambulatory care, NYC Health + Hospitals Chief medical officer, NYC Test & Trace Corps

Dr. Andrew B. Wallach, a dedicated physician and a natural leader, has headed ambulatory care at Bellevue
Hospital since 2013. He has guided his team four times to achieve Level 3 Recognition-the highest grade issued by
the National Committee for Quality Assurance-as a patient-centered medical home for Bellevue's Primary Care
Services. Under his leadership, the health system reduced primary care wait times for appointments from more
than 60 to less than 14 days. In response to the Covid-19 crisis, Wallach has led testing initiatives at the public
hospital system. As chief medical officer for the NYC Test & Trace Corps, he oversees all clinical activity for Covid-
19 testing and contact tracing citywide. Earlier this year NYC Health+Hospitals promoted Wallach to chief medical
officer for ambulatory care.

LOUISE WEADOCK Chief executive officer and chief nursing officer Access Nursing Services

In January, long before Covid-19 was on everyone's radar, Dr. Louise Weadock anticipated the fatalities and the
disruptions and strains on hospital capacity. She launched the Covid Care Force, which recruited, screened and
Covid-19-trained 1,500 nurses to work in hospitals, nursing homes and testing sites in some of the hardest-hit

                                                                                                       Page 20 of 21
                                            NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

communities in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. Later, she founded a new Access Nursing company, Covid
Clear Services, which helps employers meet the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Phase I, II and II
guidelines to safely reopen essential, nonessential and high-risk business operations in the U.S. With five city-
center offices and seven hospital-based offices, Weadock doubled her organization's workforce, employing more
than 2,000 registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, assistants, technicians and phlebotomists to work within
every clinical setting.

CAROLYN WITTE Cofounder and chief executive officer Tia

Carolyn Witte's venture-backed startup is building a personalized, care-delivery model for women. Although they
control more than 80% of U.S. health care spending, women have been underserved by a medical system that
treats them as "small men with different parts," Tia claims. Witte, a veteran of Google's creative lab, first came up
with the idea for Tia-a network of digital wellness apps, clinics and telehealth services delivering holistic care-after
her own health issues led her to become disillusioned with the status quo in women's care. Tia recently raised
more than $24 million in a new round of funding to support the expansion of its telehealth and clinical services to
new markets.

GEORGE YANCOPOULOS Cofounder, president and chief scientific officer Regeneron

Dr. George Yancopoulos has been the lead inventor and drug developer at Regeneron since the company's launch
in 1988. The biotech firm has developed blockbuster drugs for blindness-causing diseases and asthma, among
other conditions. Regeneron is among the companies that have begun human trials of experimental therapies for
the coronavirus. In June, Regeneron began clinical trials of its antibody cocktail to treat people with Covid-19 and
prevent infection. Yancopoulos has deep roots in New York. After graduating from the Bronx High School of
Science and Columbia College, he received his medical degree and doctorate in biochemistry and molecular
biophysics from Columbia University. He began his career as an academic scientist in the field of molecular biology
at Columbia.

MICHELLE ZETTERGREN President MagnaCare

Michelle Zettergren, known for her entrepreneurial spirit, spearheaded MagnaCare's recent partnership with
BioReference Laboratories to offer Covid-19 antibody testing to labor members. The initiative could help guide
decision-making about return-to-work procedures and safety measures to protect workers and the general public.
MagnaCare started in 1992 by serving organized labor and public sector clients, and it now administers health
plans for self-insured labor and commercial clients. Labor is especially worried about how to operate work spaces
safely during the pandemic, given that skilled laborers were among the first group of employees to return to work.
MagnaCare recently noted that for Covid-19 claims between March and April, patients on ventilators had average
hospitalization costs of $100,000 to $300,000.

ANDREI ZIMILES Cofounder and chief executive officer Doctor.com

Since launching Doctor.com in 2013, Andrei Zimiles has nurtured it from a small team to 200 employees. The
health care marketing company now serves more than 200 hospitals and health systems and thousands of private
and group practices. Zimiles, who began his career at age 16 building websites, recently expanded Doctor.com into
telemedicine. In May, his firm rolled out a telemedicine platform that the company says allows providers to begin
practicing medicine virtually in a matter of minutes, free of charge. Doctor.com has seen a huge uptick in
telemedicine usage. In an April survey of Doctor.com doctors, telemedicine use soared from 25% in 2019 to more
than 85%.

BARRY ZINGMAN, MD Clinical director, infectious diseases, Moses division of Montefiore Health System Medical
director of the Montefiore AIDS Center Professor of medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine

Dr. Barry Zingman, a pioneer in the field of HIV/AIDS, is helping to lead the charge to develop therapies for the
sickest Covid-19 patients. Earlier this year he oversaw a study at Montefiore Health System of the antiviral drug
Remdesivir that yielded promising results. Under a multicenter trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health,

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
                                           NOTABLE IN HEALTH CARE

his team is studying other Covid-19 treatments. Zingman is leading an initiative to offer Covid-19 vaccine studies to
Bronx residents. His interest in infectious diseases began in the early 1980s, when he was a medical student caring
for people with a then-unnamed illness that disproportionately affected young men, drug users and people of color.


Load-Date: August 13, 2020


  
