

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                  Revolutionizing medicine: Aimon Rahman on enhancing health care with deep learning




   Revolutionizing medicine: Aimon Rahman on enhancing health care with
                               deep learning
                                The Johns Hopkins News-Letter: Johns Hopkins University
                                                      November 10, 2023 Friday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: SCIENCE-TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 1
Length: 756 words
Byline: ANNIE HUANG

Body


Aimon Rahman, a third-year doctoral student in the Vision & Image Understanding Lab in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department, is making significant contributions to the field of medical artificial intelligence .
In her Hopkins Engineering Applications and Research Tutorials course titled "Introduction to Deep Learning for
Medical Imaging," Rahman introduces students to the practical applications of computer vision in medical image
analysis.

In an interview with The News-Letter, Rahman shared insights on her recent publications, as well as opinions
regarding the opportunities and challenges associated with medical AI.

Deep learning is a method of creating AI relying on neural networks, with many independent modeling layers. Their
ability to handle large and intricate datasets makes them well-suited for tasks like medical imaging analysis.

Rahman's work centers on training deep learning models to detect anomalies such as tumors and lesions across
various modalities, including ultrasound, CT and MRI scans.

One of Rahman's recent publications trains diffusion models to replicate the ''collective insights'' of doctors. Her
paper, titled "Ambiguous medical image segmentation using diffusion models," includes an algorithm that can
detect tumors given a set of images.

What sets Rahman's work apart is her approach of countering the deterministic nature of AI by using a probabilistic
model to mirror the diagnostic results of multiple doctors as collective insights.

"Let's say you have a segmentation model that analyzes medical images and segments out tumors. Whenever you
have this kind of model, it's always deterministic, meaning you input an image, and it will provide a segmentation
specific to that image. However, in a hospital setting, multiple radiologists may each have their unique diagnosis
and segmentation for the same image," she explained. "This is what I worked on last summer, where I developed a
probabilistic model. When you input an image, the network will produce a variety of segmentation maps, mimicking
the diagnostic results of different doctors."

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
               Revolutionizing medicine: Aimon Rahman on enhancing health care with deep learning

Rahman also shed light on the potential applications of her work in health care. She emphasized the timely
importance of AI and the abundance of resources available at Hopkins.

"Right now is a favorable time to delve into AI, and Hopkins offers extensive resources," she said. "My goal is to
leverage computer vision to make a meaningful impact in health care. For instance, incorporating AI into health
care can significantly reduce costs, which can be particularly beneficial for countries with limited resources and in
point-of-care scenarios."

Rahman underscored the technology's relevance in situations like wartime, refugee crises or natural disasters,
where makeshift hospitals may lack health care professionals. Computer vision and deep learning can provide
rapid and accurate diagnosis in such critical circumstances.

Looking toward the future, Rahman hopes that medical AI will make health care better and more affordable for all.

"Medical AI will be integrated in point-of-care architecture so that patients do not have to wait a long time in
hospitals. The overarching aim is to use this technology to cut the health care cost and make standard health care
more affordable in countries with few resources," she said.

However, Rahman acknowledges the challenges she faces, primarily concerning the scarcity of training data and
the generalizability of the models, an issue compounded by the unavailability of private datasets.

"The biggest challenge in the medical domain is the limited dataset availability, as medical data are not publicly
accessible," she said. "Obtaining data involves navigating ethical concerns and obtaining permissions. Moreover,
data collection by medical professionals is time-consuming."

One possible solution to these issues is the use of synthetic data - which itself is created by a neural network.
However, when asked about the possibility of using synthetic datasets for medical training, Rahman expressed
caution.

"To use a synthetic dataset, we need to have a bunch of data to begin with and train the model first, which is hard
due to the aforementioned reasons. Furthermore, relying on healthy patient data to mimic severe cases can
introduce bias into the dataset, as AI can only generate based on what it has seen before,'' she said. "We don't
want to give AI too much creative freedom so that it would create something that is impossible to occur in real life."

Have a tip or story idea?

Let us know!


Load-Date: November 13, 2023


  
