

                                                                                               Page 1 of 2
    DEC announces finalization of campground and day-use area unit management plan to help combat aquatic
                                              invasive species




          DEC announces finalization of campground and day-use area unit
            management plan to help combat aquatic invasive species
                                     Niagara-Wheatfield Tribune (Niagara Falls, New York)
                                                     September 2, 2022



Copyright 2022 Niagara Frontier Publications
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: CURRENT NEWS
Length: 567 words

Body


Changes will allow construction of facilities to store decontamination equipment, help remove harmful invasives
from watercraft

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Commissioner Basil Seggos recently announced the
finalization of a unit management plan amendment to guide siting, construction, and management of watercraft
decontamination facilities at DEC campgrounds and day-use areas. The construction and permanent placement of
watercraft decontamination facilities supports DEC's ongoing efforts to prevent the spread of harmful aquatic
invasive species (AIS).

"New York state is taking action on numerous fronts to help prevent the spread of harmful aquatic invasive plants
and animal species, including at DEC facilities," Seggos said. "The finalized UMP amendment helps authorize the
construction of decontamination facilities at DEC campgrounds and day-use areas to further our efforts to reduce
invasives and their negative impacts on our waters."

AIS are non-native aquatic plants and animals that can cause environmental and economic harm and threaten
human health. AIS have been found in many of New York's lakes, ponds and rivers, and, DEC said, "these harmful
pests can be transported from waterbody to waterbody on watercraft and equipment."

DEC manages 52 campgrounds in the Adirondack and Catskill parks, with more than 1 million visitor camper nights
each season. The campgrounds and five special use areas at Lake George Beach, Prospect Mountain Highway,
Hinckley Reservoir Picnic Area, Fourth Lake Picnic Area and Lake George Battlefield Picnic Area are visited by
nearly 400,000 people annually. Many of these visitors bring recreational watercraft with them to the campgrounds,
arriving at these DEC facilities from every county in New York, as well as many states and Canadian provinces.

DEC stated, "Research shows that recreational watercraft are a top vector for the transport and introduction of AIS
throughout the country. Watercraft inspection stewards provide education and outreach to many boaters at DEC
campgrounds. The stewards offer voluntary inspections and boat washes using special decontamination units that
have high pressure and hot water to dislodge and remove AIS from the watercraft and trailers. Currently,

                                                                                              Page 2 of 2
   DEC announces finalization of campground and day-use area unit management plan to help combat aquatic
                                             invasive species

decontamination units are housed in seasonal sheds. Moving the temporary sheds at the end of each season is
challenging and can damage equipment.

"Following a comment period announced earlier this year, DEC finalized the amendment and will advance efforts to
construct storage facilities at campgrounds and day-use areas in the Adirondack and Catskill parks to store
decontamination equipment."

The amendment is posted on the DEC website at https://www.dec.ny.gov/outdoor/camping.html. Copies of the
amendment are available by calling 518-457-2500; contacting Josh Houghton, NYS DEC Bureau of Recreation,
625 Broadway, Albany, NY 12233-5253; or emailing [email protected].

DEC "reminds water recreationists to do their part in protecting New York's waters from AIS by remembering to
clean, drain and dry watercraft and equipment. Taking proactive steps such as cleaning off fishing tackle, removing
aquatic vegetation from rudders, disinfecting boat hulls and water compartments, and properly disposing of bait,
significantly reduces that risk."

For more information, go to DEC's website at https://www.dec.ny.gov/animals/48221.html.


Load-Date: September 3, 2022


  
