

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 4
    Blockchain for Healthcare Market Future Outlook | IBM Corporation , Microsoft , Guardtime, PokitDok, Gem,
                                Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve - The Courier




     Blockchain for Healthcare Market Future Outlook | IBM Corporation,
  Microsoft, Guardtime, PokitDok, Gem, Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve -
                                The Courier
                                              The Courier: Monmouth University
                                                      January 16, 2021 Saturday



University Wire
Copyright 2021 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1357 words

Body

A new versatile research report on "Global Blockchain for Healthcare Market Size, Share, Growth and Forecast
2020-2027" is aimed at promising a unique approach towards provides highly efficient and accurate market
research services at extremely reasonable rates. Blockchain for Healthcare is the wide-ranging, top-line market
research document which combines breadth and depth of knowledge. Blockchain for Healthcare Market 2021
research report presents an analysis of statistical and comprehensive data of the global market. The market Study
is segmented by key regions that is accelerating the marketization. At present, the market is sharping its presence
and some of the key players in the study areIBM Corporation, Microsoft, Guardtime, PokitDok, Inc., Gem, Hashed
Health, Chronicled, iSolve, LLC

Get the PDF Sample Copy (Including FULL TOC, Graphs and Tables)                                  of   this   report
@: https://www.databridgemarketresearch.com/reports/global-blockchain-for-healthcare-market

Detailed Market Analysis and Insights:

Blockchain for healthcare market is expected to gain market growth in the forecast period of 2020 to 2027. Data
Bridge Market Research analyses the market to account to USD 8362.01 million by 2027 growing at a CAGR of
72.0% in the above-mentioned forecast period.

Rising adoption of blockchain technology, increasing demand of cost-effective and secured data interoperability
with the help of blockchain, introduction of transparency and immutability of the distributed ledger technology and
growing threats of counterfeit drugs are some of the factors that will accelerate the growth of the blockchain for
healthcare market in the forecast period f 2020-2027. On the other hand, increasing initiatives of the government
and surging investment for the development of advanced solutions will further create new and ample opportunities
for the growth of growth of blockchain for healthcare market in the above mentioned forecast period.

Blockchain for Healthcare Market Segment Analysis:

Analysis byEnd-User:

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 4
    Blockchain for Healthcare Market Future Outlook | IBM Corporation , Microsoft , Guardtime, PokitDok, Gem,
                                Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve - The Courier

    •   Pharmaceutical Companies
    •   Healthcare Providers
    •   Healthcare Payers

Analysis by Application:
    •   Clinical Data Exchange and Interoperability
    •   Claims Adjudication and Billing Management
    •   Drug Supply Chain Management
    •   Drug Discovery and Clinical Trials
    •   Prescription Drug Abuse

The cost analysis of the Global Blockchain for Healthcare Market has been performed while keeping in view
manufacturing expenses, labor cost, and raw materials and their market concentration rate, suppliers, and price
trend. The research carried out after the launch of a new product can help to find loopholes and devise plans to
counter that loss and increase the profits. With the reliable Blockchain for Healthcare market research report, the
chances of loss can be reduced to a large extent.

The research study evaluates the overall size of the market, by making use of a bottom-up approach, wherein data
for different industry verticals, and end-user industries and its applications across various product types have been
recorded and predicted during the forecast period. The report helps to recognize new areas for expansion, and
increase customer base. After discovering potential customers and their needs via the winning Blockchain for
Healthcarereport the same can be incorporated into the client's services.

Read complete report along with TOC @ https://www.databridgemarketresearch.com/toc/?dbmr=global-blockchain-
for-healthcare-market

Table of Contents

Global Blockchain for Healthcare Market Outlook-by Major Company, Regions, Type, Application and Segment
Forecast, 2021 -2027

Chapter 1: Market Scope Blockchain for Healthcare

Chapter 2: Global Blockchain for Healthcare Industry Analysis

Chapter 3: Blockchain for Healthcare Market Estimates & Forecasts

Chapter 4: Value Chain (Impact of COVID-19)

Chapter 5: Competitive Analysis

Chapter 6: Industry Consumption by Regions

Chapter 7: Marketing Strategy Analysis, Distributors/Traders

Chapter 8: Manufacturing Cost Analysis

Chapter 9: Industrial Chain, Sourcing Strategy and Downstream Buyers

Chapter 10: Research Findings and Conclusion

Competitive Landscape and Blockchain for Healthcare Market Share Analysis:

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 4
    Blockchain for Healthcare Market Future Outlook | IBM Corporation , Microsoft , Guardtime, PokitDok, Gem,
                                Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve - The Courier

Blockchain for healthcare market competitive landscape provides details by competitor. Details included are
company overview, company financials, revenue generated, market potential, investment in research and
development, new market initiatives, global presence, production sites and facilities, production capacities,
company strengths and weaknesses, product launch, product width and breadth, application dominance. The above
data points provided are only related to the companies' focus related to blockchain for healthcare market.

The major players covered in the blockchain for healthcare market report are IBM Corporation, Microsoft,
Guardtime, PokitDok, Inc., Gem, Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve, LLC, Patientory., Factom., Medicalchain SA.,
Proof.Works, SimplyVital Health, Inc, Blockchain AI Solutions Ltd, Change Healthcare, Doc.ai, Inc, among other
domestic and global players. Market share data is available for Global, North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific , Middle
East and Africa and South America separately. DBMR analysts understand competitive strengths and provide
competitive analysis for each competitor separately.

Global Blockchain for Healthcare Market Scope and Market Size:

Based on application, blockchain for healthcare market is segmented into clinical data exchange and
interoperability, claims adjudication and billing management, drug supply chain management, drug discovery and
clinical trials, prescription drug abuse and others.

Blockchain for healthcare market has also been segmented based on the end user into pharmaceutical companies,
healthcare providers, healthcare payers and others.

Do     You      Have    Any    Query      Or    Specific     Requirement?     Ask      to   Our            Industry
Expert@ https://www.databridgemarketresearch.com/inquire-before-buying/?dbmr=global-blockchain-for-
healthcare-market

By Geographical Regions:-

Asia Pacific: China, Japan, India, and Rest of Asia Pacific

Europe: Germany, the UK, France, and Rest of Europe

North America: The US, Mexico, and Canada

Latin America: Brazil and Rest of Latin America

Middle East & Africa: GCC Countries and Rest of Middle East & Africa

If you have any special requirements, please let us know and we will offer you the report as you want.

This Report Answers the Following Questions:
    •   What are the Global Blockchain for Healthcare Market trends and growth analysis?
    •   How many segments does the market contain?
    •   What are the Blockchain for Healthcare market opportunities, market risk and market overview that the
        market may face?
    •   How are the key factors driving keeping up with the changing consumer behavior?
    •   What are the latest industry developments for the Blockchain for Healthcare market size?
    •   What are sales, revenue, and price analysis by types and applications of Blockchain for Healthcare
        market?

About Data Bridge Market Research:

An absolute way to forecast what future holds is to comprehend the trend today!

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 4
   Blockchain for Healthcare Market Future Outlook | IBM Corporation , Microsoft , Guardtime, PokitDok, Gem,
                               Hashed Health, Chronicled, iSolve - The Courier

Data Bridge Market Research set forth itself as an unconventional and neoteric Market research and consulting firm
with unparalleled level of resilience and integrated approaches. We are determined to unearth the best market
opportunities and foster efficient information for your business to thrive in the market. Data Bridge endeavours to
provide appropriate solutions to the complex business challenges and initiates an effortless decision-making
process. Data bridge is an aftermath of sheer wisdom and experience which was formulated and framed in the year
2015 in Pune.

Data Bridge Market Research has over 500 analysts working in different industries. We have catered more than
40% of the fortune 500 companies globally and have a network of more than 5000+ clientele around the globe.
Data Bridge adepts in creating satisfied clients who reckon upon our services and rely on our hard work with
certitude. We are content with our glorious 99.9 % client satisfying rate.

Contact Us:-

Data Bridge Market Research

US: +1 888 387 2818

UK: +44 208 089 1725

Hong Kong: +852 8192 7475

Email:-corporatesales@databridgemarketresearch.com


Load-Date: January 17, 2021


  
