

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                 UK, NHS hospitals want to partner with PH on health care




                UK, NHS hospitals want to partner with PH on health care


                                                        ASEAN Tribune
                                                   December 2, 2023 Saturday



Copyright 2023 ASEAN Tribune All Rights Reserved




Length: 467 words

Body


 02 Dec 2023 (Philippines News Agency) The United Kingdom wants to increase collaboration with the Philippines
in the area of health care after a trade mission composed of National Health Service (NHS) organizations capped
its visit to Manila this week.

The trade mission was in the Philippines from Nov. 29 to Dec. 1 and met with various health care stakeholders and
government officials, including Health Secretary Teodoro Herbosa.

'The UK's leading NHS hospitals want to work with partner countries overseas to share our 75 years' experience of
innovation using research-based clinical pathways, the most advanced science and excellent training, equipment,
and digital system,' said Lindsey Gilbert-Crouch, country director for Trade and Investment.

'We feel that there is much that the UK and the Philippines can learn from one another to ensure the best possible
health care outcomes for our people.'

In a statement dated Dec. 1, the UK Embassy in Manila said the mission shared its health care challenges and
innovations with Filipino stakeholders and conveyed its interest in learning more about Philippine health care
models.

'The visit demonstrated the importance of UK-Philippines relations and will hopefully open up many more health
care collaborations in the future,' it said.

It pointed out that the UK has a strong track record of scientific breakthroughs and is delivering the next generation
of life-changing treatments, technologies, and services.

These include personalized health care using digital health and artificial intelligence (AI), and cutting-edge medical
technology.

The visit also saw the signing of a Twinning Partnership between West Yorkshire and Pasig City, which is seen to
create opportunities to grow research and innovation in the health care sector.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                              UK, NHS hospitals want to partner with PH on health care

The memorandum of understanding was signed by Mayor Vico Sotto and Richard Stubbs, CEO of Health
Innovation Yorkshire and Humber.

The pilot Twinning Partnership will take forward the development of the Philippines' first digitized patient registry for
primary care.

According to the embassy, the registry is already benefitting up to one million patients seeking public health care in
barangay health centers across Pasig City and Iloilo City.

The registry was launched through the UK's 'Better Health Programme.'

The UK delegation included Aire Logic, Health Innovation Yorkshire and Humber, Modality Partnership, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Royal College of General Practitioners, UCL Global Business School
for Health, University of Bradford, University of Leeds, and West Yorkshire NHS Integrated Care Board.

May Parsons, the Filipino nurse who delivered the first coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) vaccination outside of
clinical trials, was also present during a reception hosted for the mission.


Load-Date: December 3, 2023


  
