

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 2
                                     Can AI help improve outcomes for cancer patients?




                      Can AI help improve outcomes for cancer patients?
                                               Daily Record, The (Baltimore, MD)
                                                 September 12, 2023 Tuesday



Copyright 2023 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS
Length: 804 words
Byline: Christine Tobar

Body


Nawar Shara, chief of research data science at the MedStar Health Research Institute, has high hopes for artificial
intelligence (AI) and other technologies in the medical field.

Shara and her team have been awarded $3 million from the National Institutes of Health to study how AI can
improve outcomes for patients recovering from gastrointestinal cancer surgery.

Using a voice-assisted, remote patient symptom monitoring system (VARSMS) developed through artificial
intelligence and natural language processing technology, patients can be monitored remotely for post-recovery.
With the goal of improving communication with health care providers and, in turn, improving post-surgical recovery
outcomes, the system is designed to recognize accents and a variety of speaking cadences, providing real-time,
proactive encouragement and discharge recommendations.

The grant expands Shara’s prior research that examined how voice-assisted devices like Amazon Alexa can
improve care management for ethno-racial minority patients with heart failure. The previous study successfully
showed that AI technologies can be utilized to improve patient engagement.
“This grant builds upon the work that we have done in the past using Alexa. Instead of a canned survey where
patients are asked questions, we have incorporated language models to have explainable symptoms to act in real-
time. It allows us to intervene if the situation necessitates that,” Shara said.

Shara and her team believe that remote patient symptom monitoring tools can help prevent post-discharge
complications, especially among patient populations who historically experience worse outcomes. Black and
Hispanic patients are twice as likely as white patients to experience complications after gastrointestinal cancer
surgery. Factors including socioeconomic conditions, poor provider communication and low health literacy can
contribute to post-surgical complications. Shara and her team will use BERT, a language representation model from
Google, and ChatGPT to enhance comprehension of patient feedback.
In her previous study, the remote voice-assisted technologies helped patients remember to take their medicine or
modify their care plan based on symptoms. Providers were also able to intervene when symptoms recorded put the
patient at risk of heart failure.
“We were able to look at the dashboard as they were recovering in their homes, and in some instances, were able
to intervene to have patients come to the clinic to be seen immediately to prevent a heart attack,” she said.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                 Can AI help improve outcomes for cancer patients?

The new grant will fund the study of a randomized clinical trial of patients from high-risk populations in urban,
suburban and rural settings. Patients who have had surgery for gastrointestinal cancer will be assigned the
standard of care that includes traditional follow-up communication with their provider, or with the VARSMS system
for a 40-day period after their discharge. Shara and her team will then analyze how the VARSMS system impacts
patient outcomes and compliance with treatment plans. It will also evaluate the surgical team’s experiences.
The team is currently in the first phase of the study, which includes fine-tuning the tool, conducting interviews and
developing a system that understands the clinical flow, Shara said.

“It’s one of the most important things in health care. The clinical flow needs to be accounted for. There are steps
that the health care team follows, and we cannot just come in and interrupt. We want to ensure this tool is not
interrupting, but rather complementing,” Shara said.
The next phase will include enrolling patients and official testing will begin.

Shara believes that this is just the beginning of using AI in healthcare.

“Health care has historically lagged behind in technology because of the intricacies of the field and the sensitive
information of the patient. This is just the beginning, and the sky is the limit. But before we can say it is safe, we
really need to be confident. With big data we can identify patients who may be vulnerable and deploy preventative
measures. I think the future is really bright, but any change brings angst to us, patients and the field. If we do things
with care, these tools can be used for good,” she said.

Shara has partnered with Dr. Waddah Al-Refala, Chair of the Department of Surgery at Creighton University and
Chair of Surgery at CHI Health for the study. The research team is also comprised of experts in human-centered
design and evaluation, including Dr. Guodong (Gordon) Gao and Dr. Rita Agarwal from the Johns Hopkins Carey
School of Business and Co-Directors of the Center for Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence, and Dr. Dakuo Wang
from Northeastern University.
The five-year study is expected to conclude in 2028 or sooner.

Copyright © 2023 BridgeTower Media. All Rights Reserved.


Load-Date: September 25, 2023


  
