

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
       Democrats urge FDA to include civil rights, disability and ethics advocates on digital health committee




 Democrats urge FDA to include civil rights, disability and ethics advocates
                      on digital health committee
                                                        TheHill.com
                                               December 19, 2023 Tuesday



Copyright 2023 NEXSTAR MEDIA INC. All Rights Reserved

Section: PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS, Tech latest & US POLITICS NEWS
Length: 326 words
Byline: Rebecca Klar

Body


A group of Democratic senators asked the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to include members with
backgrounds in civil rights, medical ethics and disability rights on the agency’s new Digital Health Advisory
Committee.

The FDA announced the nine-member committee in October to help explore issues related to digital health
technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI) and wearable health technology. The committee will advise the
FDA on issues related to the technology.

The Democrats, led by Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.), urged FDA Commissioner Robert Califf in a Tuesday letter to
include at least one voting member with a background in civil rights, one voting member with a background in
medical ethics and one voting member from a disability rights organization.

The senators underscored the need for members with those backgrounds in order to mitigate concerns about bias
posed by the use of algorithms and other health technology while also acknowledging that the technologies could
also improve conditions such as patient outcomes, cost reductions and health provider retention.

“The civil rights and medical ethics implications of [digital health technologies] are manifest. It is essential that
voices with a background in civil rights, in medical ethics, and from a disability rights organization are part of the
Digital Health Advisory Committee, in order to assist the FDA as it develops regulatory guidelines that will
determine the safety and efficacy of these products. It is also crucial that the voices of those who will be using these
tools are consulted when developing these regulations,” they wrote.

According to the FDA’s announcement, the committee should be “fully operational” in 2024.

The letter was also signed by Sens. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), Bob Casey (D-Pa.), Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), Tammy
Duckworth (D-Ill.) and Alex Padilla (D-Calif.).

For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to The Hill.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
      Democrats urge FDA to include civil rights, disability and ethics advocates on digital health committee


Load-Date: January 11, 2024


  
