

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                      The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems




       The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation
                                    Ecosystems
                                      The Foundation For Research On Equal Opportunity
                                                 October 8, 2020 Thursday



Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020
All Rights Reserved

Length: 10038 words
Byline: Catherine Beaudry and Laurence Solar-Pelletier

Body


      Introduction
Canada has been performing below expectations when it comes to turning its excellent science and technology into
innovation. This is worrisome because there is ample empirical evidence of a positive relationship between
scientific research, technological innovation and economic growth.[1] Canada does well in terms of science and
technology outputs. It ranks 5th worldwide in the number of publications per thousand inhabitants, 6th for research
impact and 11th in the share of patents filed at three major patent offices, known as triadic patents (Council of
Canadian Academies 2018; OECD 2014). But both gross domestic expenditure on research and development and
business expenditure on research and development as percentages of gross domestic product are declining
(OECD 2017). Canada’s ranking in innovation is also falling. Its commercialization successes are limited and the
rate of cluster development is low (Canada 2016; Schwab 2019). This jeopardizes the country’s ability to
innovate.[2]

In addition to having difficulty translating science and technology performance into efficient solutions and
commercial successes, the country is dealing with the rapid dissemination of discontinuous and potentially
disruptive technologies.[3] These include big data analytics; artificial intelligence (AI); the Internet of things;
advanced materials; additive manufacturing such as 3D printing; and blockchain, a digital ledger of transactions
duplicated and distributed across a computer network. These technologies are drastically changing the way firms
are designing, prototyping, testing and manufacturing new products and services. As Daniele Archibugi wrote in
2017: “One of the key characteristics of disruptive technologies is that they do not knock gently at the door: they
enter social and economic life suddenly and unexpectedly” (2017, 541). Clear illustrations of this phenomenon
include the emergence of Uber, the exponential doubling of computer chip power and the rapid advances in DNA
sequencing.
Schumpeterian creative destruction forces such as autonomous vehicles, personalized medicine and the ongoing
automation of traditional manufacturing and industrial processes using smart technology are forcing businesses and
public organizations to rethink how they generate ideas and innovate. Governments are also under pressure to
provide better adapted regulation and innovation policies. Given their slow rates of technology adoption, most

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

Canadian firms appear ill equipped to overcome the challenges that stem from these technologies. Canada’s
innovation policy framework needs to be redesigned to accommodate new ways of organizing and governing
innovation.

The Innovation Superclusters Initiative, which was put forward by the federal government in 2017, is the
centrepiece of its plan to resolve Canada’s innovation paradox (Canada 2017b). Under this initiative, Ottawa is
investing $950 million over five years to support five superclusters involving small, medium-sized and large
companies, academic institutions and not-for-profit organizations. Each supercluster has its own focus: digital
technologies, protein industries, next-generation manufacturing, supply chains powered by AI, and ocean
technologies. The government says its aim is to promote commercial innovation and global presence, from ideation
to value creation, while providing the means to organize innovation ecosystems to collectively face and benefit from
groundbreaking technologies.[4] The objectives of the initiative are quite ambitious. The superclusters are expected
to increase business spending on research and development, promote widespread collaboration, attract and retain
the right talent, and increase the size and global reach of firms.
Increasing domestic firms’ size and reach, also called scaling up, has been a top priority for decades for most
countries. Yet Canada still fails to produce multinationals. Repeatedly hammering the same “scaling up” nail has not
provided the expected benefits. It is time to try something else. We at the Partnership for the Organisation of
Innovation and New Technologies hypothesize that the advantages accrued from collectively developing and
commercializing innovations within ecosystems may counterbalance the extent of scaling up required, or expected,
of firms to succeed. The superclusters initiative might prove that well-organized innovation ecosystems provide the
necessary agility and performance to become engines of economic growth and wealth creation in the country.
Working together could yield a collective performance that is larger than the sum of its parts, a win-win situation for
the ecosystem and its constituents. In our view, the concept of innovation ecosystems provides the appropriate
framework to rethink Canada’s innovation strategy.
Even though the name of the initiative includes the word “cluster”, the superclusters are in fact more akin to
innovation ecosystems. Unlike clusters, they are not locally or geographically constrained, and many of their
constituent members are part of extensive networks of national and international firms or organizations. The
concept of ecosystem, and more specifically of innovation ecosystem, is increasingly used by academics,
practitioners and policy-makers. It provides a new lens for studying and understanding innovation that goes beyond
clusters or networks. However, the concept is still not well defined and understood. And the empirical tools to
measure its broad impact have yet to be designed. In this study, we briefly survey the relevant literature on clusters
and superclusters, or innovation ecosystems, to examine the theoretical and empirical foundations that underlie the
government’s initiative. We then explore the challenges and opportunities presented by this novel policy approach.
The Building Blocks of Innovation Ecosystems
While the concept of an innovation ecosystem was inspired by ecology, its foundations within the economics and
management sciences derive from numerous strands of the literature that study and describe the way individuals
and organizations interact and collaborate formally and informally. The theoretical foundations of the concept span
industrial clusters, knowledge networks, geographic, social and cognitive proximities, collaboration and open
innovation — all of which have been shown to have a positive impact on a firm’s propensity to innovate. To fully
understand why and how innovation ecosystems have the potential to boost Canada’s innovation capacity, it is
important to understand the foundations on which they are built.
Industrial clusters
There has long been a strong interest in clusters within the scientific community and among policy-makers. Since
Michael Porter introduced the idea of clusters in 1990, few economic concepts have provoked such enthusiasm.
Still, the benefits of clustering were studied long before Porter’s seminal work. He drew on the work of Alfred
Marshall who, in his 1890 book Principles of Economics, emphasized the importance and advantages of
geographical proximity for economic growth in reducing transportation and other transaction costs. Porter initially
defined an industrial cluster as a group of geographically colocated, interconnected firms and organizations within a
sector that share common elements and are complementary to each other. Silicon Valley is a well-known and
envied example of a highly efficient and productive cluster. Other names have been given to this local concentration
of enterprises, skills, cooperation and competition, including regional systems of innovation (Lundvall 1992), flexible
specialization (Piore and Sabel 1984), smart specialization (Foray 2014) and industrial districts (Beccatini 1990).

                                                                                                           Page 3 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

These concepts all focus on the importance of geographical proximity, which allows trust-building among
stakeholders and access to a highly specialized labour force.
Research has shown that firms that operate in clusters are more innovative than firms that operate in isolation.
They generate more patents and have greater employment and revenue growth, partly due to specialization or
diversification effects.[5] The presence of strong research universities as integral parts of clusters increases the
propensity of small, local firms to patent and that of universities to coevolve along with local, private sector
patenting (Helmers and Rogers 2015; Blankenberg and Buenstorf 2016). Silicon Valley would not be the same
without the fundamental role played by Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley. Researchers
and students created spinoffs and start-ups, and went back and forth between private enterprises and the
universities.
The better performance of firms located in clusters is generally attributed to the geographical proximity that defines
them. Reducing the distance of interactions improves coordination between members of the cluster and facilitates
the sharing of tacit knowledge gained through experience or shared expertise (Bathelt and Cohendet 2014; Gertler
2003). But geographical proximity is by no means essential when knowledge is exchanged more formally (Bathelt
and Henn 2014). In other words, clusters are not a universal panacea.
Since Porter’s seminal work, interpretations of the concept of “cluster” have multiplied and evolved to incorporate
other types of proximity. The literature has shown that the degree of geographical proximity varies across local
systems of innovation, or innovation clusters.[6] Table 1 portrays a four-quadrant framework for clusters. It was
developed by André Torre in his 2006 work Clusters et systèmes locaux d’innovation. This framework helps us
analyze two crucial dimensions of innovation clusters: the degree of colocalization or geographical proximity and
the degree of organization of interfirm links or organizational proximity. The latter refers to the capacity to
coordinate the transfer and exchange of information and knowledge either within or between organizations
(Boschma 2005). Establishments within the same firm that share a common organizational culture are more likely to
have strong links. So too do firms that share a common knowledge space and have developed formal collaborative
agreements. This conceptual framework can be used to compare clusters and innovation ecosystems, as it shows
there are various ways to organize both.
Quadrant 1 represents clusters as defined by Porter. They rely to a significant degree on colocation and strong
organizational ties. Emerging clusters very likely start this way, with strong relationships between a few local actors.
They are often the result of a specific regional policy to create a cluster. Silicon Valley fits in this category. Quadrant
2 illustrates the case of clusters with weak local anchoring and strong interfirm relations. These clusters can exist at
a national and regional level. They are more akin to knowledge or innovation networks. The development and
production of Airbus aircraft, which spans the European continent and other countries, is a clear example. Airbus
has plants in China, France, Germany, Spain and the United States. Yet interfirm relations are strong. Quadrant 3
shows the third type of cluster, characterized by a high spatial concentration of firms but weak interfirm links where
knowledge is exchanged more formally. Synergy in this case can be encouraged through various national policies,
for example by bringing together firms that may benefit from fiscal incentives to colocate their research and
development activities in a science park. This type of incentive gave rise to the strong electronic games industry in
Montreal. Over time, interactions between individuals often lead to more organized links between firms in these
clusters. Quadrant 4 is not considered to be a type of cluster because it lacks both geographical and organizational
proximity.
The measured impact of clusters depends on the type of cluster being considered as well as the precision and level
of aggregation of the indicators used to gauge this impact (Beaudry and Schiffauerova 2009). Performance
indicators commonly found in the literature include the propensity to innovate and the number of innovations; the
number of patents and their citation-based quality or value; and employment and revenue growth. There is a need
to better define and assess these indicators. They are measured either at the firm level, to assess the performance
of firms within clusters compared to more isolated firms, or at the cluster level, to examine the overall performance
of the organizations therein. Rarely are both levels examined jointly to assess the extent to which the arrangement
is a win-win for the firm and the cluster. This is something that the ecosystem framework enables.
Although some view geographical proximity as an advantage in facilitating collaboration, it is neither sufficient nor
necessary for successful collaboration. Collaboration can be coordinated at a distance through temporary proximity
(Torre 2008), for instance short trips of a few days to a few weeks or months for the team to meet face to face.
Researchers have also come to recognize the importance of cognitive and social proximity for the success of
ecosystems. Cognitive proximity measures the degree to which individuals or organizations share a common

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

knowledge base. Social proximity refers to how socially close individuals are, or how well they know each other and
interact. Several researchers argue that cognitive proximity is the principal cause of tacit knowledge spillovers from
one firm to another (Breschi and Lissoni 2001). This can happen regardless of whether the firms are colocated or
geographically dispersed within a community that shares a common knowledge base. For more efficient knowledge
transmission (Agrawal, Kapur and McHale 2008), however, a degree of social proximity is also required, that is,
strong trust relations between actors based on friendship, kinship and experience (Boschma 2005).
Coherent and efficient coordination of innovation can take place at the subnational level, such as in the provinces,
territories or smaller regions in Canada. Yet national and international links to other organizations are often
beneficial to the innovation process (Walshok, Shapiro and Owens 2014). To fully understand innovation
ecosystems, we must consider another layer of links and relationships beyond geographically bound clusters. The
literature on knowledge networks provides this second building block.
Knowledge networks
The literature on innovation ecosystems often refers to the networking aspects of the relationships (the links of the
networks) between actors (the nodes of the networks), which are not necessarily geographically bound as is often
assumed in the cluster literature (figure 1). Marco Iansiti and Roy Levien describe ecosystems as being “formed of
large, loosely connected networks of entities” (2004 35). Erik Den Hartigh, Michiel Tol and Wouter Visscher
describe them as consisting of “a network of actors around a core technology, who depend on each other for their
success and survival” (2006, 2). The geographical proximity of actors is rarely considered in this literature.
Organizations, units within organizations and individuals that occupy a key network position are generally more
productive and innovative.[7] This can be a function of how highly connected (or central) these individuals and
organizations are within the network and whether their collaborators are interconnected (form a close-knit
community). For example, firms that collaborate with multiple university teams, collaborate with both suppliers and
clients to codevelop technologies, and use technologies from several providers are considered technology
integrators. They occupy central positions in their respective networks.
In highly interconnected or dense networks, knowledge and information travels relatively fast. This facilitates
knowledge sharing. Basic science networks are predominantly highly dense networks (Wagner 2018), where
access to the opposite side of the networks requires only a few handshakes. The individuals and organizations that
link different parts of a network that would otherwise be disjointed (see nodes highlighted in figure 1), often bridge
the gaps between communities, sectors, disciplines or industries. Burt refers to such gaps as structural holes
(1992). The firms and researchers that first combined biology, computer science and information engineering to
create the bioinformatics interdisciplinary field occupied such intermediary positions in their network (Freeman
1977). Since innovation often stems from the new combination of existing knowledge, these intermediaries play an
important role.
At the other end of the spectrum in terms of network structure are less dense or sparser networks. An example is
shown in figure 2. Such networks are characteristic of applied science fields and most innovation networks. As a
technology matures, moves toward market application and transforms into product innovation, firms require fewer
collaborators with which they have strong relationships, and they distance themselves from governments and
universities. That is not say that they completely isolate themselves from centres of science and knowledge
generation, but the latter are no longer in the immediate network surroundings of the firm for the technology in
question.
As such, innovation ecosystems and the superclusters are networks built to integrate different strong science
communities, well-integrated sectors and supply chains, as well as other organizations and firms interested in the
use of common key technologies. We therefore expect to find that the networks of members and researchers within
the superclusters are relatively sparse, with dense clusters of nodes united by structural holes occupied by
innovative individuals or organizations.
There is an ongoing debate in the literature about which type of knowledge network, dense or sparse, is more
conducive to innovation. Both have their strengths and weaknesses. A dense network can facilitate close
collaboration but may be impervious to outside innovation. A sparse network, with its structural holes, can
contribute to the creative process by combining ideas from diverse sectors. But it may lack the capacity for intensive
collaboration. Both models can be complementary within a sparser network structure, however. Pockets of dense,
closely linked communities connected by one or more structural holes can create strong ties among members and
intersectoral exchanges that are beneficial to knowledge exchange, idea generation and exploration (Wang 2016),
as well as innovation (Rost 2011).

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

The literature on knowledge networks is neither abundant nor conclusive regarding their role in generating
innovation in the case of the specific disruptive technologies[8] at the heart of the Innovation Superclusters
Initiative. It remains to be seen whether the players developing these technologies will be able to successfully
establish strong links with organizations using other technologies or with other sectors within the superclusters. Will
the individuals and organizations expected to occupy structural holes between technologies, and between new and
more traditional sectors, foster the recombination of knowledge necessary to accelerate innovation?
Beyond their structure, the strength of network links is also important (Baum, Cowan and Jonard 2014). Informal
relationships and collaborations, such as social ties, participation in associations and their events, trade fairs and
international community gatherings, and even knowledge trading, play a crucial role in catalyzing knowledge within
innovation ecosystems as well as in open innovation (Henkel, Schöberl and Alexy 2014; West et al., 2014). These
informal ties, which are implicit in the cluster literature and are formally acknowledged but considered difficult to
measure in the network literature, are what make innovation ecosystems work. This is particularly important in the
case of disruptive technologies, where problem solving requires more extensive collaboration and a certain degree
of openness. As AnnaLee Saxenian pointed out, Silicon Valley engineers who once worked together remained in
contact after moving firms and often interacted formally and informally to exchange information and solve
technological problems (1994). Social, organizational and cognitive proximity between individuals was crucial to the
rise and maintenance of the Silicon Valley advantage. This collaboration culture blurred the boundaries of firms.
Collaboration
If innovation clusters and knowledge networks are the building blocks of innovation ecosystems, collaboration is the
glue that brings both concepts together. Collaboration within and between organizations or sectors acts as a
catalyst. It accelerates the sharing of information, skills and resources; improves the generation, valuation and
validation of ideas; increases the capacity of organizations to innovate; and spans disciplines, organizations,
sectors and users.[9] Firms that collaborate with their clients, suppliers and universities are generally more
innovative. Firms are often located close to their clients or to their suppliers, but that does not necessarily mean
they collaborate with them. Collaboration can occur across different types of proximity, be it geographical, cognitive
or social, and at different stages of the innovation value chain, such as at the knowledge, ideas or project stage.
The challenges posed by discontinuous and potentially disruptive technologies will demand broader intersectoral
and interdisciplinary collaboration from firms seeking to benefit from such changes. The speed at which these
technologies impose themselves on the market will force the codevelopment of new innovation practices, policies
and regulation involving all stakeholders. It is therefore imperative to rethink the roles of and collaborative
relationships between policy-makers, decision-makers, experts, academics and final users.
For instance, universities and other contributors to science and technology are expected to help develop new
technologies and commercialize the fruits of their research through mechanisms such as technology transfers,
licensing and the creation of spinoffs, or with the help of the private sector (Breznitz and Feldman 2012). In
particular, research collaboration between the private and public sectors is seen as essential, which is why
university-industry links have become an integral part of the university funding landscape (Goldfarb 2008). The
nature, process and value of the resulting innovations are well documented (OECD 2015). Far from being
detrimental to science, university-industry links lead to research that has more impact (Lebeau et al. 2008). This
raises the question of Canada’s poor performance in this regard. University-industry links that bridge the gaps
between knowledge, technology and innovation[10] were expected to be the key to improving Canada’s innovation
performance. The results have been disappointing.
Innovation Ecosystems as a Metaphor
The concept of innovation ecosystems draws broadly on the literature and research investigating the benefits of
innovation clusters, various types of proximities, knowledge networks and collaboration. Because innovation
clusters and knowledge networks are known to have a positive influence on innovation, we expect that
organizations involved in strong innovation ecosystems should also be more innovative (Adner 2006).
The economist Michael Rothschild was the first to use the term “ecosystem” as a metaphor in the economics and
management of innovation literature. His 1990 book, Bionomics: Economy as Ecosystem, inspired James Moore to
describe firms and their networks as business ecosystems. “In a business ecosystem, companies coevolve
capabilities around a new innovation: they work cooperatively and competitively to support new products, satisfy
customer needs, and eventually incorporate the next round of innovation” (Moore 1993, 76). By transposing the
notion of the biological ecosystem to the economy, he also redefined the economic system as an ecosystem where

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

organizations and consumers represent living organisms intertwined in mutually dependent relationships (Moore
1996).[11]

Business ecosystems include small and large businesses, universities, research centres and public sector
organizations and tend to position themselves around a leading company (Peltoniemi 2005). Such ecosystems may
include a company’s competitors as well as its customers, whose behaviour is likely to influence the company’s
performance. The diversity of the actors involved is partly attributable to the digital transformation of several
industrial sectors. It also reflects the convergence of a variety of technologies and industries, such as data science
in precision medicine, industrial Internet of things in aerospace, 3D printing in health, and AI in mobility services. By
coevolving their skills, the various organizations that constitute the business ecosystem create value for their
customers (Moore 1996). The term “ecosystem” emphasizes the crucial role of networking and the participation of
varied actors in the innovation process (Smorodinskaya et al. 2017).
The concept of business ecosystem focuses on the firm and its network. Some researchers built on this concept as
they examined the way firms were using external as well as internal resources in the innovation process. This led to
the notion of innovation ecosystems and of open innovation ecosystems (Adner 2006; Rohrbeck, Hölzle and
Gemünden 2009). Open innovation provides key insights on how innovation ecosystems work and perform.
Open innovation
Collaboration, cooperation and open innovation are of paramount importance to well-functioning ecosystems. This
was implied in the cluster literature and formally measured in the literature on knowledge networks. Many firms had
already adopted at least some forms of open innovation before the concept was first described by Henry
Chesbrough in his 2003 book, Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology.
Indeed, since the 1970s, research and development is no longer performed entirely within the firm. The locus of
innovation has migrated out of a company and into the value network to which it belongs (Brandenburger and
Nalebuff 1996). The value network has replaced the concept of value chain because products and services have
become dematerialized and the value chain no longer has a purely physical dimension. In value networks, value is
cocreated by a combination of players in the network. This compels a degree of open innovation, defined as “the
use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal innovation, and to expand the markets for
external use of innovation respectively” (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke and West 2006).
Open innovation encompasses three main groups of activities: inbound activities, outbound activities and a mixture
of the two generally referred to as coupled activities.[12] An organization undertakes inbound activities when it
mobilizes external resources and knowledge acquired, for example, through licensing or crowd-sourcing. Firms with
greater market knowledge may acquire new innovations in order to sell them to other organizations. Outbound
activities refer to the external use and exploitation of internal knowledge. Such activities consist of transferring
knowledge and the results of internal research and development to external partners for them to commercialize. For
example, a firm could benefit from selling or granting access to some of its intellectual property to a company that
has a business model better suited to the commercialization of that technology. A company may also decide to
externalize the commercialization of internal knowledge when the latter does not match its strategic objectives. This
can generate revenues from technologies, goods or services that would otherwise have remained on the shelf.
Coupled activities are a combination of the first two, where sharing complementary resources among partners can
lead to critical innovation.
As the previous paragraph suggests, open innovation does not necessarily involve collaboration. A firm may, for
instance, find an external path to market for a technology that it does not want or need to commercialize itself.
Conversely, firms may contract out research and development activities or obtain a licence for patented
technologies without signing a collaborative agreement.
With open innovation, innovation is no longer confined to the boundaries of a firm. It is developed at least partly
outside the organization with other firms, governments or universities. Many factors contributed to this change in the
way organizations innovate, among them the increasing complexity and cost of research and development, and
accelerated technological change. Opening to other organizations allows firms to break down silos, acquire more
resources, reduce risk and share knowledge and resources.[13] Linear and closed innovation processes, as well as
traditional business models, have evolved toward more open and interactive structures, where informal links adjoin
formal relationships (Cohendet and Simon 2017; Autio and Thomas 2014). The concept of open innovation
perfectly complements the literature on clusters and networks in characterizing the links between different types of
organizations within innovation ecosystems.

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

Ecosystem diversity
Open innovation underscores the importance of collaboration between diverse stakeholders, each of whom
contributes to innovation in its own way. Within innovation ecosystems, the focus of analysis is on the interactions
between interdependent actors whose objective is to create and market innovations benefiting the end user. While
business ecosystem studies concentrate on the firm and its environment, innovation ecosystem studies focus on
innovation and the constellation of actors that support it.
An organization can be involved in various ecosystems (knowledge, innovation or business ecosystems) and play a
different role in each (Valkokari 2015). Similarly, while the same set of diverse actors from different sectors,
businesses, universities or government institutions may populate business and innovation ecosystems, their role
and importance differ from one ecosystem to another. A firm can be the leader of an ecosystem, but leadership can
also fall to another type of organization, such as a university or a government entity. Relationships are not strictly
hierarchical among ecosystem members but rather collaborative. This makes network literature useful when
studying these interorganization links.
The core of business ecosystems consists of firms, suppliers, consumers and distributors. Other organizations are
only weakly involved. In contrast, innovation ecosystems are characterized by the importance of research
institutions, local intermediaries and policy-makers. They include participants from outside the traditional value
chain (Valkokari 2015). These can be customers, universities that provide science and technology, regulators,
innovation coordinators or intermediaries, and firms that coevolve with the ecosystem, often in symbiotic
relationships (Mazzucato and Robinson 2017).These participants are often geographically concentrated, which is
why the cluster literature remains relevant in studying innovation ecosystems.
Silicon Valley clearly functions as an innovation ecosystem. While governments have tried to imitate or reproduce
Silicon Valley, few have succeeded by adopting a simple cluster approach. With the superclusters initiative,
deliberately anchored in Canada’s technological, sectoral and economic strengths, Ottawa is experimenting with
something different. It is trying to encourage intersectoral collaboration, which does not come naturally to most
firms.[14]
Innovation Ecosystems in Practice — the Canadian Superclusters
According to the government’s program overview, the Innovation Superclusters Initiative is meant to encourage the
establishment of “large-scale industry partnerships, supported by other innovation ecosystems players.” Aspiring
superclusters were asked “to work together on ambitious market-driven proposals to supercharge their regional
innovation ecosystems, enhancing the growth and competitiveness of participating firms and maximizing economic
benefits, including good, well-
paying jobs and prosperity for Canada” (Canada 2017a). A key objective is to promote widespread wealth creation
through the adoption of new and potentially disruptive technologies within innovation ecosystems, particularly by
small and medium-sized enterprises.
This bold approach aims to reverse Canada’s deteriorating innovation performance, accelerate the adoption by
Canadian firms of several key transformative technologies and foster a strong entrepreneurial or start-up culture.
The government hopes that by facilitating the involvement of all stakeholders in the superclusters, bottlenecks such
as the snakes-and-ladders game between regulation and innovation and other difficulties in translating science and
technology into successful products can be overcome. Under the initiative, universities, government laboratories,
innovation intermediaries and firms of all sizes are having to work together to develop a functional governance
structure for these very large innovation ecosystems. This is expected to help flag problems along the innovation
value chain and create the climate of trust necessary for greater collaboration among different disciplines and
sectors.
More generally, promoting the emergence of strong innovation ecosystems that span several sectors, even beyond
those involved in the superclusters initiative, has the potential to strengthen Canada’s innovation capacity and
competitiveness. The literature surveyed in this article certainly hints at the potential benefits of innovation
superclusters, although their true economic impact has yet to be accurately measured. Learning from the
experience of the innovation superclusters and that of other innovation ecosystems is timely and crucial for the
Canadian economy.
Despite their names, the five superclusters are centred on technologies rather than industrial sectors. These are
detailed in box 1. While all superclusters have a strong local base, they span several regions of the country,
building on numerous strong, local technology hubs. The concept of innovation ecosystem is the appropriate
framework to study the supercluster initiative but, as we have shown, it is a concept that encompasses several

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

others. No single strand of the literature can fully describe the ways in which the superclusters initiative can help
reverse Canada’s downward innovation spiral, nor how it can become a successful Canadian innovation in and of
itself. The lens needed to understand how the superclusters operate, to measure whether they achieve their goals
and to evaluate their performance does not yet exist. More research is needed to equip organizational actors with a
comprehensive conceptual framework and the appropriate indicators and decision-making tools to bring about the
necessary transformations.[15]
Key performance indicators: Measuring what matters
The initial program guide provided to applicants wishing to take part in the superclusters initiative included four
clearly stated objectives and a list of seven key performance indicators to measure expected outcomes over the life
of the program. These are detailed in box 2. This signalled the government’s intention to monitor the impact of its
investment. Although they broadly cover the main goals of the initiative, the initial key performance indicators
consist mainly of generic indicators that, in our view, overemphasize basic metrics such as the number of
collaborative projects, participating companies and organizations, and the number of jobs created in small and
medium-sized enterprises. These provide a good starting point to measure results, but are too simplistic to gauge
the full impact of the superclusters initiative on innovation and collaboration. Since the initiative was launched,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada has been consulting with experts and working with
members of the five superclusters to develop a more detailed and precise set of indicators. Some of these are
included in box 3. [16]
The first group of key performance indicators in box 3 underline the need to boost investment in industrial research
and development. Business enterprise research and development has been chronically below par in this country.
Canada has been falling behind other OECD countries on this indicator for more than a decade (CCA 2018). The
revised indicators are an improvement on the initial indicators proposed by recognizing the importance of investing
in demonstration and commercialization activities, which often become increasingly costly as the technology moves
toward the market. It will be important to track whether and where these investments take place.
More generally, the updated performance indicators are directly aligned with the government’s strategy to advance
business-led innovation and technology leadership activities, and to boost productivity, performance and
competitiveness. The dollar value of such investments provides a strong indication of business commitment to
innovate, but we also need to be able to monitor how the superclusters go about implementing the necessary
changes. Boosting a firm’s productivity, performance and competitiveness requires putting together the best teams
and mobilizing the right set of resources to foster innovation. The former requirement can be gauged in part by the
number of science and technology professionals participating in supercluster activities, the number of jobs created
and the rate of employment growth in small and medium-sized enterprises. Whether the right set of resources has
been assembled can be measured by the outcomes: the number of products and processes developed, improved
and commercialized.
The third set of indicators also includes the number of patents or copyrights. This is an important addition to the list
because, in some cases, the technologies being promoted by the superclusters are at a relatively embryonic stage
of development. It is likely that some of the most ambitious projects will only reach a relatively early stage of
technology maturity by the end of the five-year program. Having an interim indicator, such as the number of patents
and copyrights, will provide an idea of the innovation potential of the supercluster.

Translating investment in research and development into innovation is a necessary step to improving economic
growth. Yet the actual economic impact of these activities in terms of increases in revenue, market share or exports
was absent from the government’s initial list of indicators, although such indicators are included in the strategic
plans of most superclusters. They are now on the government’s list, focusing on two elements: increases in
contributions to gross domestic product and in the share of small and medium-sized enterprises that export goods
or services. This definition of wealth creation, however, is considerably narrower than the aggregate economic,
social and environmental benefits contemplated by the Council of Canadian Academies in its 2018 report.
Canadians expect government investments in innovation to lead to improved quality of life, pollution reduction,
health improvements and poverty reduction. Ultimately, these are the types of outcomes that we should be
measuring. But it is notoriously difficult to do so.
The idea behind the second set of key performance indicators is that more collaboration between private, academic
and public sector organizations will improve the country’s commercialization performance. The extent of university-
industry collaboration is used as an input indicator in the innovation literature and by the World Economic

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

Forum.[17] But simply counting the number of collaborative projects will not be conducive to large-scale
collaboration and may even be counterproductive as it encourages a multiplicity of small projects. Having an
excessive number of small projects or larger projects broken down into smaller ones to meet performance indicator
requirements will make it more difficult to coordinate and to measure the overall impact. These biases may be
partially counterbalanced by also counting the number of member organizations involved in each project, although
this is more suitable for larger or more important projects. And, while these metrics may be indicators of scale and
potential reach, they fail to convey any information about the quality of the links and relationships within the
ecosystem or how productive they are in terms of outcomes. Indicators aimed at characterizing these relationships
should be developed to monitor progress over the course of the initiative. Finding ways to measure the benefits of
collaboration would be a further challenge, but it would help offset potential biases linked to simple project counts.
The expanded set of indicators emphasizes innovation ecosystems’ growth, monitoring employment growth in
participating small and medium-sized enterprises and the number of new jobs created overall. Tracking the number
of new firms created and the number of high-growth firms involved in the supercluster is consistent with the scale-
up objective. Some caution is warranted, however. Beyond the desired spinoffs, start-ups and gazelles alluded to in
the government’s objectives, many of the high-growth firms that will be added to the count likely already belong to
existing sectors. Many of the so-called new employees come from somewhere else. Although this is not a zero-sum
game, employees who leave their current employment to move to small and medium-sized firms involved in the
superclusters will deplete firms, sectors, regions and ecosystems elsewhere.
The inevitable but beneficial workforce mobility involved in the innovation process should be taken into account. For
example, when an aerospace firm is developing a new aircraft, its workforce is likely to decrease if demand is
declining for its older aircraft models. Yet this is often the most innovative period for the company. Simply counting
the number of employees, or employment growth, will not reflect the firm’s innovative capacity embodied in its
employees. We suggest that measures of the quality and innovative capacity of human capital in relation to the
stage of development of the technology be added to the indicator list. Existing innovation surveys already gather
information on the number of employees with technical, science and engineering degrees, PhDs, or those devoted
to research and development or tasks related to commercialization. A culture that encourages employees to
innovate is an important contributor to the innovation process. Mercan and Goktas (2011) used elements of the
Global Innovation Index developed by the World Economic Forum and INSEAD, a graduate business school
(Schwab 2019), to measure innovation culture. With the power of big data analytics at our fingertips, we can go one
step further and account for the experience employees have had in past projects and their involvement in
successful innovations.

Given the government’s focus on technologies rather than sectors in designing the superclusters program, an
important missing performance indicator relates to the transfer and adoption of technologies by firms and
organizations in sectors other than those that produce them. As shown in box 1, there is a particular focus on
promoting the adoption of digital technologies and AI by Canadian firms. How transformative these technologies will
be for the firms that adopt them will need to be assessed. Successful adoption is likely to occur through informal
relationships and the sharing of tacit knowledge, which are difficult to measure. It is the key to greater competitive
advantage and wealth creation for the adopting firms and organizations.
The contribution of innovation ecosystems to economic growth, competitiveness and wealth creation cannot simply
be measured in terms of the number of new products or processes or increases in exports, productivity and gross
domestic product. Some of the superclusters such as NGen, the supercluster focused on next- generation
manufacturing, have adopted more extensive performance ­indicators. Yet their overall approach is the same as
that of the government.[18] Such indicators may be easier to quantify, but they are at best proxies for innovation
and its impact. Ultimately, the government and the superclusters will need to develop more sophisticated indicators
to truly measure the potential and the impact of innovation ecosystems. This will enable stakeholders to adapt
innovation practices and policies to provide a win-win environment for the ecosystems and their constituent
organizations.
Supporting effective innovation ecosystems: Addressing knowledge gaps
The Innovation Supercluster Initiative provides a unique opportunity to advance knowledge about superclusters
beyond a few simple metrics aimed at demonstrating value for the public investment. Gaining a better
understanding of supercluster dynamics would benefit not only policy-makers but all stakeholders. Indeed, the
supercluster initiative should be viewed as somewhat of a Canadian experiment. Identifying the factors that facilitate

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                 The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

the emergence and success of these superclusters and other ecosystems will help policy-makers better design and
fine-tune innovation policies and programs. The timing is certainly propitious. Having mobilized their communities
around specific technologies or sectors, groups that applied but were not chosen to become superclusters in 2017
have tried to maintain momentum by setting up more formal governance structures and accessing various
government programs. Identifying and measuring the commonalities and divergences of other innovation
ecosystems as they emerge would help governments target the right policies to foster their success.
We urgently need to design and test new metrics adapted to the reality of innovation ecosystems. The tools
currently at our disposal provide measurements that are at best proxies for true innovation potential. We need
indicators that accurately reflect the complex dynamics of collaborating across provinces, sectors and organizations
on the digital transformation of traditional sectors while making the most of the discontinuous and potentially
disruptive technologies.
There is still much we need to learn. For instance, the way in which innovation ecosystems emerge, adapt to
paradigm shifts brought about by new disruptive technologies, and bridge the gap between science and technology
and the commercialization of innovation is still poorly understood. Ecosystems are not static. They evolve as
innovations develop. It is therefore important to identify the characteristics and similarities of different types of
innovation ecosystems at different points in their life cycle. This includes their contribution to and impact on the
generation and conversion of ideas and on the commercialization and implementation of innovation.
We do not yet know how to assess the different governance structures that span informal and formal relationships
within innovation ecosystems. To ensure that the superclusters and other innovation ecosystems operate efficiently
requires a deeper understanding of the organizations and individuals at the core of these networks and the specific
roles they play as the convenors or facilitators of their ecosystems. There are numerous examples of successful
governance structures, shared intellectual property and trust-based collaborative groups in Canada. But they are
often well-guarded secrets. The Consortium de recherche et d’innovation en aérospatiale au Québec (CRIAQ) is
one example. Under the CRIAQ contract between universities and aerospace firms, all prior intellectual property is
declared and new intellectual property is shared among the industrial partners, without preventing academics from
conducting further research on the subject. This model has existed for several years and has contributed to
enhancing Quebec’s aerospace innovation performance.
A crucial task is to accurately gauge the win-win conditions for both individual organizations and ecosystems. It
would be counterproductive to adopt key performance indicators at the level of the individual organization, whether
it is a firm, university, government organization or innovation intermediary, that are incompatible with those at the
level of the innovation ecosystem. A minimum degree of coherence is necessary to ensure the success of well-
organized innovation ecosystems. That raises questions. How much self-organization or self-governance do
ecosystem members require as opposed to, or in addition to, a more top-down approach? How loose or formalized
should the decision-making process be within the ecosystem? How should its convenors oversee decision-making
to foster innovation? In the case of the superclusters, a strong sectoral governance structure may dominate and
impose itself, but it may not produce the expected innovation boost.
Developing new and validated key performance indicators for innovation ecosystems is one of the main goals of the
Partnership for the Organisation of Innovation and New Technologies. Although the scope of our project is broader
than measuring the impact of the superclusters, our research community has much to learn from innovation
ecosystem dynamics and the success factors underlying their performance. The superclusters initiative provides
fertile ground to test new ways to assess industrial and ecosystem performance and to compare those results with
more traditional metrics such as those mentioned in boxes 2 and 3. It is encouraging that the department of
Innovation, Science and Economic Development wishes to remain at the forefront of new research and is open to
developing news ways to measure the impact of its supercluster program. It has been a partner of our organization
since the beginning and is codeveloping with us these new indicators of ecosystem innovation and performance.
Challenges for Innovation Ecosystems and the Superclusters
In Canada, we are still looking for the recipe to scale up firms. How to scale up ecosystems is an even greater
challenge. We know, for instance, that stakeholders take part in ecosystems because they see an opportunity to
resolve issues and develop market opportunities. Firms scale up when their market expands locally or
­internationally. Ecosystems should help in that regard. However, multiorganization collaboration requires the
integration of working practices and processes. This can be challenging, especially when multiple organizations
from multiple sectors are involved. But aligning scaling up with multiorganization or sectoral collaboration is
precisely where the potential advantage of innovation ecosystems and superclusters lies.

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 12
                  The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

A related question to be investigated is whether innovation ecosystems are agile enough to provide an alternative to
the need for firms to scale up to succeed. Organizations and ecosystems are increasingly seeking to coordinate a
variety of activities that were formerly scattered across diverse entities focused on different technologies. They are
doing this not only to accelerate the innovation trajectory toward commercialization but also to overcome the cost
pressures, technological complexity and social acceptability issues that are making innovation projects more
complex. Complexity is forcing firms to collaborate. More research is needed to develop and implement new
practices, platforms, roles and functions to operationalize and govern ecosystems and their member firms as they
scale up. This is particularly important when multiple sectors are involved, as is the case for most superclusters.

As traditional economic sectors (aerospace and manufacturing in general) look to benefit from advances in big data
analytics and AI technologies, it is important to document and understand how ecosystems successfully evolve in
response to the challenges brought about by these technologies. Gaining better knowledge of these new networks
and collaborative spaces will contribute to the development of effective public policies and industry practices that
are conducive to the sustainability of ecosystems.

In this context, it is particularly important to understand the “modularity of technological artifacts” within innovation
ecosystems (Beltagui, Rosli and Candi 2020). This term refers to the degree to which the components of a
technology can be separated and recombined. At the heart of the supercluster initiative is the government’s wish for
a wide-scale digital transformation of the Canadian industrial fabric. Adoption of new digital modules within an
industry or sector, such as manufacturing or health care, will disrupt traditional innovation processes and constitute
a paradigm shift in all the sectors that will be affected. For instance, big data analytics is transforming the health
care ecosystem by recombining specific technological and medical modules (such as AI, genomics and
pharmacology), further personalizing medical treatment and fostering the emergence a new digital health
ecosystem. In the manufacturing sector, 3D printing will revolutionize and shorten the product development
process, displacing some of the traditional ways used to produce and assemble complex objects. The
manufacturing sector will need to evolve to benefit from these new technologies.
The integration of new technologies in more traditional sectors may require the use of specific creativity methods,
such as design thinking, to explore how to best combine knowledge from unrelated disciplines and sectors.[19] This
will likely involve other ­stakeholders, such as users and non-experts, which adds a level of complexity.
Organizations must come up with new configurations to support the development of creative ideas through both
internal and external initiatives (Cohendet, Grandadam and Simon 2010). Identifying the instigators of these
transformations will help trigger change in laggard sectors, clusters or ecosystems.

To fully benefit from their innovation ecosystems, individual firms will also need to adopt more open and agile
business models adapted to constant ecosystem evolution (Attour and Burger-Helmchen 2014). Analyzing how
sectors that have successfully adopted these advanced technologies have managed the transition would provide
invaluable knowledge for other sectors and ecosystems about to experience similar transformations. Worldwide,
efforts are being deployed to implement industry 4.0 (the adoption of digital technologies by manufacturing), smart
cities, self-driving cars, personalized medicine and smart electric grids. What these innovations have in common is
that they combine knowledge and technologies from a variety of sectors or disciplines. Their impact is also cross-
cutting. For instance, industry 4.0 and its underlying technologies will not only affect the manufacturing sector, but
also health, transport and agri-food. Breaking down disciplinary and sectoral silos within ecosystems will be crucial.
Yet public policy and regulation are still developed in sectoral silos that struggle to adapt to these disruptive
technologies. Moreover, the speed at which these radical innovations enter the market leaves decision-makers in
catch-up mode. This limits the innovation potential of the country.

Canadian public policy needs to change to enable the necessary transformations within firms, universities,
government and society in general. New policies are needed to support the extensive combination of knowledge
that spans multiple disciplines and sectors. Regulatory harmonization for sectors such as aerospace and health,
which are already undergoing a vast digital transformation, and information and communication technology is
urgently needed to avoid stopping transdisciplinary and cross-industry innovation in its tracks. To take one example,
the extent of data collection and the stringency of the cybersecurity required for precision medicine to fully deploy
suggest a clear shift is needed in the way we address regulation. One avenue that holds promise is for
governments to codevelop targeted public policies and appropriate regulations with innovation intermediaries in

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 12
                    The Superclusters Initiative: An Opportunity to Reinforce Innovation Ecosystems

ecosystems. Innovation support mechanisms also have to be developed in parallel with regulation. This would
provide a reinforcing policy framework where regulation is no longer seen as an obstacle to the adoption of new
technologies and to innovation in heavily regulated domains. [20]
Conclusion
At the beginning of this study, we highlighted the growing concern that Canada has failed to benefit from its strength
in science and technology when it comes to ­successfully commercializing innovation. The last two decades have
seen a proliferation of university-industry funding programs. Yet these have failed to produce the desired outcomes.
Something different is needed. Taking the bull by the horns, so to speak, the government initiated the Innovation
Superclusters Initiative to try to reverse the downward trajectory of innovation. Starting from the premise that united
we stand, the program aims to build a critical mass of partnerships between research facilities and industry that will
boost innovation, productivity and competitiveness. Encouraging a more coordinated approach to ensure that
transformative technologies[21] reinvigorate industrial capabilities is a bold move that is being followed closely by
other countries.
Noting that the Canadian superclusters are in fact more akin to innovation ecosystems than clusters, we briefly
surveyed the pertinent literature on the building blocks of innovation ecosystems. These include industrial clusters,
knowledge networks, collaboration and open innovation. As none of the lenses suffices to comprehend the
dynamics of innovation ecosystems, we argued that a multidisciplinary framework needs to be developed to fully
understand how the superclusters operate, to measure whether their goals are achieved, and to evaluate their
performance.

Furthermore, as they prepare for the adoption, diffusion and impact of discontinuous and potentially disruptive
technologies such as AI and industry 4.0, Canadian firms are having to acquire a whole new set of skills that they
may not have the capacity to absorb on their own. The speed at which new technologies are being developed
forces all stakeholders to be involved from the beginning in well-coordinated collaborative entities, such as
innovation ecosystems or superclusters. Accurately monitoring the success of innovation ecosystems and of the
firms and organizations therein requires the development of new indicators. These indicators would complement the
traditional key performance indicators that we automatically turn to because they are relatively easy to measure,
master and understand. Herein lies the challenge. The extent of the coordination required to ensure the success of
the superclusters, or to propose how to change tack in real time if need be, is unprecedented. So too is the task
entailed in accurately measuring that success.
Developing, testing and providing new and more appropriate performance indicators for innovation ecosystems is
the challenge our team took on in 2018. Such indicators will be invaluable. They will ensure that the cross-cutting
impact and innovation potential of integrating knowledge and technology from multiple sectors and disciplines is
taken into account. They will also help Canada develop effective and reinforcing innovation policies and regulatory
frameworks adapted to innovation ecosystems. The results of our research will help Canadian innovation
ecosystems, including the superclusters, evolve and have a long-lasting positive impact on our economy.


Load-Date: October 9, 2020


  
