

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                                    Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4




                    Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4
                                             Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Washington)
                                                       July 13, 2023 Thursday



Copyright 2023 Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Walla Walla, Wash.)

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 2966 words
Byline: Loryn Kykendall, Walla Walla Union-Bulletin, Wash.

Body


Jul. 13—Read more

Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

Here's what to expect in the Walla Walla County primary election

Alayna Brinton

Age: 36

Occupation: Small business owner, nonprofit executive director and chief clinical officer

Education: Alayna Marie Brinton has a B.S. in psychology and B.A. in sociology from Washington State University
(2007-2010). She obtained a master's degree in clinical social work from Walla Walla University (2011-2013).
Currently pursuing a master's in business administration with an emphasis on organizational psychology at Eastern
Washington University.

Previous elected offices: National Association of Social Workers, Washington State Regional Representative (2017-
2019); Blue Mountain Health Cooperative Executive Board chairwoman (2020-present); Walla Walla Community
Health Advisory Board member (2022-present); Community Development Block Grant Advisory Board member for
Walla Walla (2023-2025).

Leadership service: Alayna actively contributes to multiple professional associations and serves on local county and
city advisory boards. Other professional experience includes roles such as a hospital advocate and crisis responder
at the Benton County Sexual Assault Response Center (2005-2007). Served as the treasurer for the Student
Disabilities Association at Walla Walla University (2013-2014). Chairs the Fundraising Committee for the Blue
Mountain Health Cooperative. Participated in the search committee for the program director of the Bachelor of
Social Work program at Washington State University (2022). Engaged in various community service initiatives,

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                               Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

including organizing a seminar to support veterans and their families. Engaged in Sherwood Leadership training
and advocacy work related to improving access to books representing people of color (2019-2020).

Zana Carver

Carver declined to answer questions for the U-B's candidate questionnaire. Below is information provided by Carver
to the Secretary of State.

Occupation: Associate professor of biology, Columbia Basin College.

Education: Ph.D. in environmental and natural resource sciences, Washington State University; M.S. in biology,
University of Saint Joseph.

Community service: Women in Science: Removing Obstacles and Believing in Yourself for the League of United
Latin American Citizens Club at Columbia Basin College; Community Engagement Board (WWPS truancy
guidance); preschool/Sunday school teacher; Pacific Northwest Department of Energy Regional Science Bowl;
Robert Frost Elementary School Science Fair judge.

Professional experience: Associate professor of biology at Columbia Basin College, 13 years with two Exceptional
Faculty Awards, two years on Faculty Senate, chaired Financial Affairs Committee, Peer Review Committee chair.

Eric Rindal

Age: 62

Occupation: Founder and former owner, Waterbrook Winery, 25 years; founder and partner, Ingio Winery ERP
Accounting Software, 22 years.

Education: Two years college, multiple institutions in Washington, Oregon and California with studies in wine and
computer science.

Previous elected offices: WWPS director, Position 4.

Leadership service: Walla Walla Parks Advisory Board member and past Chair; past president, Washington Wine
Institute; the Michael and Susan Dell Foundations Ed-Fi Alliance Advisory Group, a non-profit grant organization
promoting data interoperability in K-12 Schools.

Three candidates are vying for Position 4 on the Walla Walla School Board in the upcoming primary election with
incumbent Eric Rindal being challenged by newcomers Alayna Brinton and Zana Carver for a four-year term on the
school board.

These candidates will appear on the ballot for the Tuesday, Aug. 1, primary election. Mail-in ballots must be
postmarked by Aug. 1.

Below are Q&A responses from Rindal and Brinton. Carver declined to answer the U-B's candidate questionnaire.

Why do you want to continue as (or become) a school board member?

Rindal: Serving as a board member for the first time, it takes a minimum of a couple of years to learn the policies as
well as the less public insights into the district institutional knowledge base that are required components to be a
competent and contributing school board member. In my fourth year I am still learning new things every month.

Our district represents a moderately sized public agency that presides over more than $100 million annually,
including its general fund and capital debt repayment fund — fully 47% of our community tax base. Not continuing
in a second term necessitates board turnover that then requires someone new to start this daunting process once
again.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                               Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

Much of what is done on any school board requires a considerable investment of time to become functionally
proficient in terms of the district programs and finances. No one is born a school board member. I would hope to
continue to use what I have learned in the past 3 1/2 years to continue to serve as a fully contributing member of
our board.

One of the misconceptions of school boards is that board members are focused on all the latest cultural catch
phrases and declare for one side of the culture war or the other. Listening to the community comment section of a
board meeting I am often struck by the obvious divide. Whether that be pro equity, LGBTQIA2S+, student rights or
being against CRT, sex ed or lack of parental rights, the list is endless when it comes to taking up sides.

Yet in actuality board members have almost nothing to do with any of those issues down at the teaching core.
Curriculum standards are set at the state level. Staff decides which curriculum best teaches those state standards
and the board effectively rubber stamps those decisions in almost every case.

When it comes to our teaching culture, our district teachers span the entire spectrum with those coming from both
the left and right. Boards can't dictate culture any more than we could change the opinions of our community
commenters — nor should we.

What we actually do is to make sure a lot of little details are being properly attended to by the administration to
assure all students are learning. It's not all that complicated conceptually yet decidedly complicated in practice.

A lot of this is ministerial such as approving the check run every couple weeks, but we do have influence on what
gets funded through the annual budget process. Learning how schools are funded is extremely complex yet in the
end comes down to a simple count of the number of students. What a board has discretion over is a very small part
of the budget as around 80% is dedicated to staff salaries.

This last year we spent an enormous amount of time on building a new strategic plan that will guide the district over
the next five years. Significant public input was taken from which the board's role was to distill that down to a few
core ideals that will ultimately assure all students learn and become competent citizens as they grow to become our
new adult community members.

K-12 schools have and continue to experience rapid change in pedagogy. This is the result of teaching processes
moving from a one size fits all, "we taught it; some learn, and some do not" model, to one where individualized
mastery for all is the required standard. The new model promises a minimum set of attested competencies at each
grade level. With this approach we now collect far more data to assure these promises are being met, yet we must
do so without it leading to a system where students and teachers spend more time testing than learning.

Key to this challenge is to integrate collection of data by leveraging the data in the systems we already have — not
create yet more data collection overhead. Districts now possess immense quantities of data on far more than just a
student's address, grades and test scores. That data is actually growing is scope each year, yet much of it is
isolated in hundreds of separate single purpose systems that don't exchange data between themselves.

Much of the data we collect is for state compliance reporting yet we often fail to maximize its real time value to our
teachers at the classroom level. Students are far more than their test scores. What is occurring emotionally in a
student's life can be just as critical to learning and student success than are test scores. Measures of other school
and community engagement are often more predictive of student success. How well we integrate all these discrete
systems over the next few years will be a key component in improving student outcomes and something I hope to
be able to continue to contribute to.

A third reason I want to continue relates to critical climate change. Our students need to understand the effects of
both current, as well as those climate change effects still to come as the earth continues to warm over their
lifetimes.

                                                                                                            Page 4 of 6
                                Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

I have been the lone voice on the board to move the district to become a zero net energy district. I have been
responsible for bringing electric buses to our district this past year. I will push to include renewable energy in all new
district projects.

Solving a large worldwide problem often comes down to tackling the problem right in your own community and I
hope to continue as a part of the solution.

Brinton: I want to be a school board member to further contribute my professional expertise and drive positive
change in education, prioritizing student well-being and equitable access to resources. As a licensed independent
clinical social worker with a strong commitment to mental health, I have dedicated my career to providing mental
health care and advocating for individuals of all ages. I opened Anchor Point Counseling as a private practice and
founded the nonprofit Blue Mountain Health Cooperative.

Both of these experiences allowed me to make a tangible impact on redirecting mental health clients to appropriate
care and supporting the development of student clinicians, both of which are critical to the maintenance of our
system of behavioral health care in the Valley. Additionally, through my active participation in professional
associations and service on local advisory boards, I have gained valuable insights into community needs. By
combining my clinical knowledge and community engagement, I am motivated to become a school board member
to utilize my expertise, contribute to positive changes in education and ensure student well-being and equitable
access to resources.

What makes you the best candidate for this position?

Rindal: I point to my record of accomplishments.

During the period of remote learning during COVID, I alone focused on finding a way to test students and staff.
Though many said we did not have the capacity or funds I was able to find the Binaxnow pilot program for schools
and was able to assist in getting WWPS to be part of the pilot. Within days of testing start, students returned to in-
school instruction.

I was instrumental in finding and promoting a grant to fund three new battery powered buses for our district. These
new buses are far less costly to operate and yield significant health benefits to students through reduction in
exposure to diesel particulates.

I personally wrote a successful $200,000 grant to fund a new data engineer position in the district.

Brinton: My dual role as a parent of current WWPS students and a dedicated advocate for mental health makes me
the best candidate for this position. I have the insight and passion needed to make informed decisions that prioritize
the well-being and academic achievement of all students. I understand many of the hopes and concerns of parents
and am committed to learning about the challenges I do not yet understand. I am committed to creating an
educational environment that nurtures the growth and development of every child.

What are your thoughts on the proposed levy to update athletic facilities?

Rindal: In comparing WWPS to any of the Tri-City schools the committee used as sports complex examples, we
actually differ significantly in scale. It is important to remain cognizant of the differences in our relative district
budgets. That said, levy dollars per thousand at WWPS are among the lowest in all the southeast Washington area
by a significant margin.

An issue still unresolved is providing for a maintenance fund to maintain any new sports facilities our citizens may
approve. We have not spent significantly out of our existing general fund budget to maintain what we have now and
"new" tends to become "used" very quickly. The source of the required funds to maintain any new capital projects
will need to be identified.

Bottom line: The facility need is clear. Funding it responsibly is what is still less clear to me. If that can be resolved,
I'm all for it as we all want the best for our Walla Walla kids.

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 6
                               Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

Brinton: It is important for our school district to provide well-rounded opportunities for our students. While academic
achievement is crucial, extracurricular activities, including athletics, also play a significant role in the overall
development of our kids.

The proposed levy to upgrade athletic facilities warrants careful consideration. Upgraded facilities can enhance the
student experience, promote physical fitness and foster a sense of community pride. However, it is essential to
weigh this investment against other pressing needs within our district, ensuring a balanced allocation of resources
that benefits all students.

Additionally, community input and thorough financial analysis should guide the decision-making process to ensure
long-term sustainability and equitable access to upgraded facilities.

How do you feel about the use of artificial intelligence in schools?

Rindal: I feel the same way about AI as I do about social media. Clearly social media's original promise had
surpassed its reality, especially with respect to young girls and issues surrounding mental health and self-worth.

AI's promise is almost unlimited but without any guardrails being provided to guide its use, it will likely be used as
much for socially inappropriate purposes as it is for human good.

We know from many studies that the best learning outcomes are generated out of a 1:1 teacher to student relation.
AI has the potential to bring us closer to that notion than anything prior, yet given our prior experiences, we need to
do better job this time to make sure the good substantially exceeds the bad.

Brinton: There are potential benefits and significant challenges associated with the use of artificial intelligence (AI)
in schools. AI technology has the capacity to enhance educational experiences, personalize learning and provide
valuable insights for teachers and administrators. It can support adaptive learning platforms, streamline
administrative tasks and promote innovative teaching approaches.

However, it is crucial to approach AI implementation with caution, ensuring student privacy and data security are
safeguarded. Additionally, ethical considerations, transparency and human oversight should be prioritized to
maintain a balanced and equitable learning environment. Collaboration with educators, parents and experts is vital
to navigate the opportunities and challenges that AI presents in schools.

What are your thoughts on the recent efforts to ban certain books from school libraries?

Rindal: Banning books is wrong. Knowledge, even of the type we may personally disagree with, has value — even
if only to support why we might disagree with it. Any Socratic discussion requires students be equipped with
multiple perspectives if they are to adequately defend their own ideals. Having a broad base of perspectives to draw
upon often leads to more complex and nuanced conclusions and is the basis for critical thinking skills.

Banning books is about control of thought by some, over freedom of thought that is being exercised by others. A
small step further is being forced to read propaganda to enforce specific ideals.

Society and our students are best served by having a broad set of ideas represented in our libraries and online. We
have staff trained to guide our students and we also provide web access for parents and guardians to monitor as
well as limit what their student consumes from our libraries. Parental choice is always the final arbiter.

I voted with the rest of the board to affirm keeping the books that were challenged this past year based on our
current policy of reviewing them with "Consideration of the entire work, rather than extracting passages or parts;
weighing the values and faults against each other and weighing the conflicting opinions based on the materials as a
whole."

Conversely, I was the sole vote to affirm the request to add a few conservative titles that were suggested as
counterpoint.

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 6
                              Candidate Q&A: Walla Walla School District Position 4

As I said, banning any book is wrong regardless of how it might be viewed through any current political lens. In my
opinion, knowledge is only dangerous when access to it is restricted.

Brinton: As a prospective school board member, I strongly believe in promoting intellectual freedom and fostering a
culture of open-mindedness in our schools. It is crucial to provide students with access to a diverse range of books
and materials that encourage critical thinking, empathy and exploration of different perspectives.

Rather than focusing on banning books, I believe in implementing thoughtful selection processes that consider age
appropriateness and align with the values and educational goals of our community. It is essential to engage in open
dialogues with educators, parents and students to ensure a well-rounded collection of books in our school libraries.

Editor's note: This article was updated to include the complete response from the candidates.

___ (c)2023 Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Walla Walla, Wash.) Visit Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Walla Walla, Wash.)
at union-bulletin.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: July 14, 2023


  
