

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                                        No Headline In Original




                                                    No Headline In Original
                                                    The Malone Telegram (New York)
                                                     September 18, 2021 Saturday
                                                             Both Edition



Copyright 2021 Johnson Newspaper Corporation
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: MT_AGRICULTURE
Length: 691 words
Byline: Justin Tucker AgEducator Cornell Cooperative Extension

Body


a Goat Reproduction Clinic being held at Tucker's Ranch. 299 Hazen Road, North Lawrence, on Sept. 25, at 10
a.m.

The most common reasons for breeding goats is for the production of milk, meat, and fiber. A male goat is called a
buck, unless it's castrated, and then it's called a wether. Female goat's, also called doe's, will typically give birth
(kidding) in the springtime, usually having one to three kids. Did you know that baby goats are called kids?

 Farmers are trying to keep up with the demand for goat products. Artificial insemination helps farmers maximize
their herd genetics and profits. Keeping good records throughout the year helps to ensure a successful breeding
program. If you're using a buck to breed then be sure to keep records of when the doe's come into cycle. Some
breeders will choose to use a hand selected buck to breed their does and others use artificial insemination (AI).
Both ways have some pros and cons depending on what your goals are and depending on how much time, labor,
and money you want to put into your breeding program.

 There are 14 common breeds in America: Nubian, Alpine, LaMancha, Oberhasli, Saanen, Sable, Toggenburg,
Boer, Nigerian Dwarf, Angora, Pygmy, Myotonic (2 types), and Crossbred breeds. Each breed has some individual
characteristics that compliment their individual qualities. Goats are a hardy, small ruminant breed that can be very
adaptable, fun, and profitable. They are the perfect size for many situations such as raising a few as pets or in
larger numbers for the production of dairy products or meat. Many different products are made from raw goat's milk
such as soaps, lotions, fluid beverage products (low fat, flavored, or fortified), frozen products such as ice cream or
frozen yogurt, and ultra-high temperature (UHT) milk and fermented products such as cheese and yogurt. Many
other products are produced as well.

 There are several reasons for AI which include herd health improvements such as; conception rate, number of
kids (newborn goats) born alive, multiple pregnancies of twins and triplets, number of surviving kids at weaning age,
and their performance at each phase. By breeding with AI, the breeder can use superior sires to maximize genetic
improvements in the herd.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                                No Headline In Original

 Using AI also prevents the spread of diseases and helps limit the genetic base by only using a few bucks, in turn
reducing the spread of any unwanted genetic defects. One buck can naturally breed anywhere from 20-30 doe's, if
using AI, the breeder could use semen from one buck to breed an entire herd, eliminating the need for a buck
entirely in some situations. Some breeders will choose to lease their buck to other farms and might trade the use of
the buck during breeding season, in exchange for boarding the animal for the winter months. Sometimes this is a
good option for someone that does not have housing for a buck all year. Bucks can be difficult to keep separate
from the doe's if the correct fencing is not used. They can also be somewhat obnoxious, especially during the
breeding season. They tend to have a very distinct smell of urine during the fall months.

 Determining the health of the doe at breeding time is critical to how the doe might respond to each reproduction
method. Always make sure your bucks and doe's are in optimal health prior to breeding because the health of
each animal will determine the efficiency of your breeding program.

 A doe's estrous cycle is twenty-one days and usually takes place in the fall and lasts for 24-48 hours. Their
gestation cycle lasts 145-155 days. Hormones can be used in sequence to stimulate follicular development, control
CL function, and regulate ovulation. Sometimes breeders will choose an Estrus Synchronization protocol to ensure
a uniform kid crop and to properly manage the pregnant doe's. Take good notes throughout the entire process and
make the correct adjustments to your breeding program along the way. Each situation is unique, so try to evaluate
what fits your situation best (Natural or AI). Establish a list of genetic traits you are looking to improve in your herd
and see which method works best for your farm.


Load-Date: September 18, 2021


  
