

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                SUNY , UAlbany to Research AI for Mental Health Treatment




               SUNY, UAlbany to Research AI for Mental Health Treatment
                                                Government TechNology
                                                July 19, 2023 Wednesday



Copyright 2023 Government Technology

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 692 words
Byline: Aaron Gifford, Government Technology

Body


Jul. 19—Researchers at State University of New York at Albany (UAlbany) and SUNY Downstate Health Sciences
University are studying artificial intelligence-powered solutions for treating mental illness around the globe.

The initiative was announced in a recent news release after representatives from both schools returned from a
global Health Innovation Exchange (HIEx) meeting in Switzerland to formalize plans with various international
partners. UAlbany Vice President for Research and Economic Development Thenkurussi "Kesh" Kesavadas told
Government Technology on Tuesday that much of the future research will involve an AI supercomputer currently
under construction at UAlbany that's expected to go online next spring.

Kesavadas said supercomputers develop the next generation of AI and deep learning technology using trillions of
data points. At UAlbany, he said, this technology will map and analyze the human brain. The long-term goal is to
improve mental health-care capabilities globally to the point where technology can detect conditions earlier and
doctors can monitor patients more efficiently, somewhat lessening the impact of shortages of health-care workers.
UAlbany's AI supercomputer will be one of the largest in the nation located in a university setting, and the biggest
within the SUNY system, Kesavadas said.

Although specific research projects within this massive initiative have not been specified yet, and the partners are
still seeking additional funding from public and private sources, Kesavadas said faculty and staff across various
UAlbany departments, to include public health, psychology, nanotechnology and engineering, have already
committed to future efforts. SUNY Downstate will conduct clinical research on underserved patient populations.

"Bringing in people from different backgrounds and combining our expertise is important," Kesavadas said.
"Collaboration is the key."

HIEx is particularly interested in providing better mental health care in Asian and African countries, according to the
news release. Biju Jacob, the organization's chief technology officer, said economic problems, climate change,
disasters and health emergencies are contributing factors to the 25 percent increase in mental disorders in Africa
and Asia.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
                           SUNY , UAlbany to Research AI for Mental Health Treatment

"We need a radical shift in mental health-care delivery, as the current approach has failed to address this silent
pandemic," Jacob said in a public statement. "That shift is possible only through digital technologies and AI-based
community-centric care. This partnership is particularly aimed at creating a technology framework and backbone to
quickly translate cutting-edge technologies to practice."

David Christini, SUNY Downstate senior vice president for research, said the partnership between the two SUNY
campuses and HIEx is aiming at "substantive global advancements in mental health care."

"Identifying and treating mental health and wellness has grown increasingly important as our global society faces
challenges that dominate everyday living," Christini said in a public statement. "We are excited to redouble our
mental health research efforts and see tremendous potential in utilizing AI to advance diagnosis and treatment."

While AI-powered research is developing new methods for treating mental health, Kesavadas said, existing virtual
reality or augmented reality (VR/AR) could be deployed around the globe in the meantime to treat patients. He said
these low-cost tools can be customized to work with different health-care systems, languages and customs, adding
that advocating for increased mental health screening around the world and reducing the stigma of mental health
disorders are important tasks that the partners in this initiative can get working on right away.

"We have plenty to get started with to analyze different conditions," Kesavadas said. "There are various domains.
You can monitor people's actions through the tracking of Apple watches and social media — especially in student
environments. You can see how moods are changing."

___ (c)2023 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: July 20, 2023


  
