

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                        Professor on using AI to detect medical errors, the future of AI in medicine




  Professor on using AI to detect medical errors, the future of AI in medicine
                                            The Stanford Daily: Stanford University
                                                  August 26, 2020 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 545 words
Byline: Amanda Zhu

Body


Scripps Professor of Molecular Medicine Eric Topol gave a talk on the future of artificial intelligence in medicine at
the Stanford Artificial Intelligence in Medicine & Imaging Symposium on Aug. 5, where he discussed developing
medicine that is much more accurate than it is now. According to Topol, there are over 12 million serious medical
errors per year, leading to added costs and other complications.

In one sense, machines are much more capable than humans at detecting errors, Topol said. Machines are able to
find different medical complications that doctors themselves may not be able to find, such as tumor nodules, and
can advance medical technology, as with mammographies.

"If you show this picture [of a retina] to retinal authorities, their chance of getting [the gender] right is 50%," Topol
said. "But interestingly, an AI algorithm can be trained to be 97 to 98% accurate."

Machines can identify many other aspects of a patient simply from the retina, including one's possibility of kidney
disease, Alzheimer's and diabetes and age and sex. Topol said applications of AI are not limited to images of the
retina: AI can interpret all sorts of slides and images that pathologists cannot see or make conclusions.

"This is going to affect, in the future, every medical discipline," he said. "There's no exception here. And it's not just
those in the hospital. It's paramedics, it's all the paraprofessionals, pharmacists - the works."

Topol said AI would transform the health and medical field with tasks such as interpreting scans, selecting embryos
for in vitro fertilization and predicting death in hospitals. AI will also greatly improve the resolution and quality of
medical scans.

"Machines will not replace physicians," Topol said, quoting professor and neurosurgeon Antonio Di Leva. "But
physicians using AI will soon replace those not using it."

Even with the tremendous potential of AI applications, Topol still emphasized that humanistic medicine is important
in the long-term advancement of AI in medicine.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                       Professor on using AI to detect medical errors, the future of AI in medicine

Even now, Topol said that patients often feel rushed during their doctor visits. It's not uncommon to see physicians
typing on computers or facing their screens, without making eye contact with patients during doctor visits.

Topol said in medicine there is a lack of empathy, which companies and institutions should focus on improving.

"We want to restore the humanistic side - the critical component - of what is medicine," Topol said.

Contact Amanda Zhu at amandaz9888 'at' gmail.com.

.css-10w0hkr{margin:0 auto;width:100%;}@media (min-width:1100px){.css-10w0hkr{width:650px;}}

While you're here...

We're a student-run organization committed to providing hands-on experience in journalism, digital media and
business for the next generation of reporters. Your support makes a difference in helping give staff members from
all backgrounds the opportunity to develop important professional skills and conduct meaningful reporting. All
contributions are tax-deductible. Support the Daily $50$200$1,000OtherMake my donation a monthly donation. Get
Our EmailsDigest Amanda ZhuAmanda Zhu is a high schooler writing as part of The Daily's Summer Journalism
Workshop..css-qmqbsq{margin:0 auto;width:100%;}@media (min-width:1100px){.css-qmqbsq{width:600px;}}


Load-Date: August 26, 2020


  
