

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                                  Deals may be down, but the city's tech industry is still up




                 Deals may be down, but the city's tech industry is still up
                                                   Crain's New York Business
                                                          October 9, 2023
                                                           Print Version



Copyright 2023 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 1; Vol. 39
Length: 1033 words
Byline: Jack Grieve

Body


There's a flawed narrative that New York City's tech industry is receding. After a decade of embracing a growth-at-
all-costs mindset, according to this narrative, the sector peaked in 2022 and it's now feeling the hangover.

There's some merit to that storyline. Venture capital investment in tech is shrinking, and there's no sign of when it
will bounce back. Meanwhile, IPOs are almost nonexistent, and some of the biggest names in tech are bleeding on
Wall Street.

A look under the deal sheets, however, paints a more nuanced picture. The city is overflowing with available tech
talent. Artificial intelligence is in the early stages of what could be a dot-com-level boom. C-suite executives are
confident in their companies' growth in New York, according to a new survey, and more tech firms are choosing to
do business here than ever before.

"Tech in New York City feels super optimistic right now," said Julie Samuels, founder and president of Tech:NYC,
which acts as a booster for local tech firms. "Obviously the industry has faced some headwinds-you've seen that
internationally-but it feels like we've really navigated that quite well."

Touting tech talent

Perhaps New York's biggest selling point when it comes to the state of tech is its abundance of talent. There are
now more than 370,000 tech workers across New York, according to the latest data from real estate firm CBRE.
That means there are more jobs in tech than on Wall Street.

"The city is benefiting a lot from the exodus from San Francisco," said Jordan Fliegel, managing director at
TechStars NYC, one of the industry's leading local accelerators. "It might not be as good as tax-free startup places
like Austin, Texas, and to a lesser extent Miami, but New York is already a top two or three tech hub in the country
and is moving to No. 1."

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                              Deals may be down, but the city's tech industry is still up

It's not just out-of-town talent. New York is now producing a tech workforce of its own.

"We are just doing a much better job of spinning up tech talent locally," Samuels said. "The tech sector here has
really doubled down on supporting workforce development efforts, supporting computer science education in
schools, and we're really starting to see that investment pay off."

There's perhaps no better example of that than the Cornell Tech campus on Roosevelt Island. The school launched
in 2012 as a collaboration between the Mayor Michael Bloomberg administration, Cornell University and the
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology and almost immediately began producing homegrown tech talent.

Firms are following

Industry leaders have long believed that if a startup wanted to be taken seriously, it had to be in Silicon Valley. A
Manhattan office could come second, but home base for a U.S. firm had to be California. That belief has faded in
recent years, and much of that has to do with New York's people.

A survey published today from Tech:NYC and Accenture, "Tech Talent Hiring Trends Survey," shows that company
leaders are overwhelmingly optimistic about tech talent in New York. Ninety-nine percent of employers surveyed
this past summer said they are confident in their ability to secure needed tech skills in 2023 from the talent pool in
the city. The survey included 350 C-level executives working across 11 industries for organizations with at least one
work location in the city.

That confidence is breeding growth. This past winter, New York edged out Silicon Valley with the most early-stage
startups in the U.S., according to equity management platform Carta. There are now more than 25,000 tech
startups in the region, and Google is expanding its New York footprint.

Funding fright

While employees and employers alike are bullish on tech in New York, the industry is far from immune to the dry-up
of venture capital activity across the economy. Investments are down in nearly every sector, and tech has been hit
harder than most.

VC activity peaked in 2021 with roughly $55.8 billion flowing to New York-area startups, according to data provided
by PitchBook. Software firms were on the receiving end of nearly half of that. Then VC activity began to dip in 2022,
and the city's overall VC investment fell to $34.7 billion, PitchBook reported. Still, about 50% of VC funding went to
tech firms.

Now, at the close of the third quarter of 2023, investment to date looks bleak for both the city writ large and tech in
particular. City startups have seen $14.3 billion in funding rounds thus far; for tech firms, that number is just $5.5
billion.

"The narrative of 2021 was that capital was really just falling out of the sky, there was more capital to be put to work
from investors than startups even needed," said PitchBook VC analyst Vincent Harrison.

Investors were more willing to back a pre-product tech company in favor of growth potential, he said. Now, the
focus has switched to profitability and cash flow.

"That has obviously shifted dramatically, and there is now a lot more capital that startups need than investors are
able to supply," Harrison said. "These software companies are not able to rely on just growth prospects when they
are seeking out investments."

Much of that remaining investment is being directed toward the development of AI, which has managed to buck the
slowdown in deal activity. There were 26 deals that totaled $565 million in the first quarter of 2023 alone, according
to an analysis from Deloitte. The analysis showed that climate tech and health care tech firms continue to fundraise
relatively well.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 3
                              Deals may be down, but the city's tech industry is still up

"If you're building in AI or health care or a few other categories, it's hot," Fliegel said. "For everyone else, it's
certainly down compared to the first half of last year and way down from the year prior. But those were like the
greatest years ever, so it's still a relatively healthy correction."

The people interviewed for this story were uncertain about the immediate future. No one wanted to make
predictions. One big question, it seems, is whether AI will be more like crypto-fast growth then a crash-or more
sustainable like the dot-com boom. Also, there are a lot of questions around venture capital.

"AI, large language models, everything around that are super hot," Fliegel said. "VCs are throwing money at that
pre-product, pre-revenue."


Load-Date: October 12, 2023


  
