

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                                            Create introductory AI flag requirement




                                Create introductory AI flag requirement
                                        The Daily Texan: University of Texas - Austin
                                                      March 5, 2023 Sunday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 730 words

Body


We live in an era in which artificial intelligence can complete highly complex tasks. From writing a Petrachan sonnet
about the Hobbesian state of nature to detecting and classifying geological features on planets and moons, AI is no
longer science fiction. Rather, AI permeates every aspect of our lives.

The need for a workforce equipped with AI knowledge is crucial. UT evidently understands this demand, as they
recently implemented an online AI master's degree. But undergraduate-level AI classes remain exclusive to
computer science majors. Other majors should have the opportunity to develop career skills in AI.

UT should provide access to AI education across the student body. Creating an introductory AI flag requirement
could increase AI enthusiasm and allow students to better understand its trends, benefits and global impacts.

Undeclared sophomore Anmol Sandhu explained she has limited knowledge about AI's workings, but teaching
everyone about AI can dispel fears of an AI-dominated world.

Read more Texan opinion:

In light of pause on DEI efforts, students, faculty must seek solidarity

COUNTERPOINT: Eliminate foreign language requirements

POINT: Importance of language classes

Closing laptops opens minds

"I have the bare minimum (knowledge) about the backgrounds of AI," Sandhu said. "I feel like (AI is) something
everyone should know a little about. ... AI is everywhere and can be scary. If you know the facts about it at the
present, it won't be as scary in the (future)."

Dr. Peter Stone, Robotics Consortium Director and a founding member of the Good Systems initiative, elaborated
on why AI literacy is vital.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 3
                                         Create introductory AI flag requirement

"Having somebody who is grounded in what's realistic and possible with AI programs and about the different types
of algorithms, approaches and models. ... As AI programs influence many sectors of the economy, I think it's going
to be more essential that people have some kind of AI literacy," Dr. Stone said.

Dr. Stone also explained how certain graduate-level AI courses could be adapted to the undergraduate-level as
introductory AI courses.

"I think the (graduate) class I co-taught ... and the syllabus we put together would work pretty well as an
undergraduate class," Dr. Stone said. "There was a programming component to the course, but if you get rid of that,
the course readings we assigned, and the topics we covered, would be a good introductory course for a broad set
of students."

An introductory-level course that fulfills an AI flag requirement could contain AI overviews, applications of
knowledge-based technologies, ethical implications and beginner programming concepts. Such courses could
additionally be tailored to specific majors. For example, a psychology student could enroll in a class about AI
revolutionizing mental health diagnoses, while a marketing major could take a class on algorithmic targeting
campaigns.

Conrad Li, a computer science senior and the founder of Engineering and Computational Learning of Artificial
Intelligence in Robotics, sees a future where AI classes are a standardized core requirement. He believes an
introductory AI course should also be redesigned for students who lack advanced math skills.

"The courses need to be designed so that (students) with a high school algebra level can understand it," Li said. "I
mean, in the future, I could definitely see (AI classes) as a core requirement... It's going to be more prevalent in
society as technology progresses."

UT has a responsibility to its students to prepare them for an AI-dominated future and give them a competitive
career edge. An AI flag requirement across majors could allow all students to access AI education and gain a
deeper and more nuanced understanding of its role in our lives.

Muyeed is an economics sophomore from Southlake, Texas.

Read Next

In light of pause on DEI efforts, students, faculty must seek solidarity

COUNTERPOINT: Eliminate foreign language requirements

POINT: Importance of language classes

Closing laptops opens minds

About the Contributors

Meredith Roberts, Opinion Illustrator

Meredith is a sophomore radio-television-film and journalism double major from Dallas, Texas. She has been an
opinion illustrator and videographer...

Aruna Muthupillai, Opinion Illustrator

Aruna is a Plan II Honors and International Relations freshman from Pearland, TX. Currently, she works as an
opinion illustrator. Outside of working for...


Load-Date: March 5, 2023

                                                            Page 3 of 3
                  Create introductory AI flag requirement



