

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                             Governments Consider Ethics, Transparency in Cutting-Edge Tech




         Governments Consider Ethics, Transparency in Cutting-Edge Tech
                                                Government TechNology
                                             December 1, 2021 Wednesday



Copyright 2021 Government Technology

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 885 words
Byline: Julia Edinger, Government Technology

Body


Dec. 1—As Stephen Hawking once said, "Our future is a race between the growing power of technology and the
wisdom with which we use it." As the COVID-19 pandemic pushed government to rapidly modernize for the remote
world in 2020, 2021 saw public agencies grapple with making this transition equitable, transparent and secure.
During the past year, emerging technologies have reshaped not only what government is able to do for
constituents, but also people's expectations of government.

While public-sector agencies found their footing in the remote world, private-sector innovation has been reaching
new heights — quite literally, as in the realm of space travel. Elon Musk's SpaceX launched multiple rockets into
space, while Jeff Bezos and Richard Branson launched themselves. And the work of these three billionaires'
extraterrestrial exploration is happening at a time when satellite Internet is becoming a more viable option to
connect currently unserved communities to the Internet.

And as satellite Internet options skyrocketed, the pandemic challenged governments, driving new public-private
partnerships and solutions; for example, private partners are helping government make significant strides toward
universal broadband.

Other tech has followed a similar trajectory. Robots and drones are more commonly delivering food, medicine and
other products. Some government uses though, like the New York City Police Department's robot dog Spot, spurred
feedback from the public and civil liberties groups holding on to surveillance fears.

One notable advance in recent months is the use of virtual and augmented reality in the public sector. While its
specific value is still being studied by organizations like the National Institute of Standards and Technology, it is
reshaping the way many agencies engage, train and retain talent. From workforce development to tourism to
emergency response, it has been found to improve retention and reduce training costs.

The pandemic also gave way to other significant changes in the workforce, highlighting the gaps that exist in certain
sectors, including IT. While some state solutions, like Indiana's Hoosier Talent Network, use artificial intelligence to
help match candidates with job openings, some experts have raised concerns about the technology's potential for
bias — an issue which frequently gets raised during debates on government use. The World Health Organization

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 2
                          Governments Consider Ethics, Transparency in Cutting-Edge Tech

released a report this year offering guidance for ethical use of AI within the health sector, but a comprehensive set
of regulations for AI in government has yet to be established. Meanwhile, government continues to explore its use,
notably to advance cybersecurity defenses and achieve workflow efficiencies using tools like robotic process
automation.

Ethical questions have also been raised about facial recognition as disparities are brought to light about the way
this tech identifies transgender people, people of color and nonbinary individuals. Several cities and states have
implemented regulations banning or restricting the use of facial recognition and other AI-powered tools to calm
fears over their use, suggesting the tech still has some work to do in proving its value.

Federal policymakers set their sights on deepfakes in 2021, videos that feature realistic audio and video of a person
that has been fraudulently manipulated. For example, this technology could make it look like any authority figure is
saying something they never said. These videos are an increasing concern in the misinformation discourse,
prompting discussions on how to curb their proliferation online. Programs like Cyber Florida are offering students
the skills to determine validity of information they find on the Internet and underlining the value of this particular skill.

But while government entities have rapidly made modernization strides in the COVID-19 era, newer does not
always mean better. In their rush to deploy new technology, some are quick to dismiss the value of legacy systems
that can still capably do the important work of government. Take COBOL, for example, a programming language
five decades old that surfaces often in conversations about the shameful state of legacy IT. But COBOL, and other
older tech, is a known quantity with known capabilities. A more targeted problem-solving approach, rather than an
abolish-all-legacy-tech approach, is likely the most prudent course, as new tech might not always add value to the
enterprise.

"And at the end of the day, what you now have is a new program that does exactly the same thing as the old
program, and you sit down and you say, 'Why did I spend my money on that project?'" asked William Malik, vice
president of infrastructure strategies at Trend Micro, in a piece examining COBOL this year on govtech.com.

Ultimately, technology leaders in government must continue to smartly evangelize the benefits new tools can bring
in making public-sector organizations better at their core missions. By advocating for scalable pilots where results
are closely measured and transparently reported, CIOs have a key role to play in maintaining and growing the
public's appetite for innovation using new technology.

___ (c)2021 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: December 2, 2021


  
