

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                             NSF grant funding to support health monitoring system for elderly




         NSF grant funding to support health monitoring system for elderly
                                  The New Voice: University of North Carolina - Charlotte
                                                      April 26, 2022 Tuesday



University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 343 words

Body


A pair of interdisciplinary researchers from architecture and engineering recently received a grant from the National
Science Foundation to use artificial intelligence to improve health care among the elderly.

The funding of $255,992 is through a Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I grant, designed to assist
researchers transform scientific discoveries into commercial products.

Mona Azarbayjani, associate professor of architecture, and Hamed Tabkhi, assistant professor of electrical and
computer engineering, are collaborating on the project, "Camera-Based Multimodal AI for Health Monitoring." Their
goal is to use cutting-edge technology to improve the care of older people in both home and institutional
environments.

Mohammadreza Baharani, an engineering postdoctoral fellow, and Ph.D. candidate Roshanak Ashrafi also are
members of this research team whose investigations with several of the University's areas of research excellence:
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence, smart and sustainable cities and urban health.

According to census data, in the next decade one of every five Americans will be 65 or older, and by 2034, the
elderly will outnumber children for the first time in census history. At the same time, the number of health care
workers is dwindling - particularly home health aides and nursing home attendants, and the industry is experiencing
a dire shortage.

According to the researchers, their remote patient monitoring project will enable holistic, accurate and faster
monitoring of elderly people that will improve their quality of life and health; address the future nursing shortage,
particularly in the geriatric field; and reduce health care costs.

Azarbayjani and Tabkhi both work in the interdisciplinary Infrastructures and Environmental Systems program. They
began their partnership three years ago with research into "smart building" technology that can monitor occupants'
body temperatures from a distance, without the need for direct person-to-person contact.

Read more on the College of Arts + Architecture website.

                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                       NSF grant funding to support health monitoring system for elderly


Load-Date: April 27, 2022


  
