

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                                    U Receives $100 Million for Responsible AI Initiative




                     U Receives $100 Million for Responsible AI Initiative
                                         The Daily Utah Chronicle: University of Utah
                                                November 22, 2023 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 580 words
Byline: Jamie Faux

Body


The University of Utah recently received a $100 million investment for a new initiative on responsible artificial
intelligence. Led by the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, this initiative will focus on improving aspects of
civil rights, privacy and civil liberties. It will also be used to address important challenges in the community including
sustainability, health, society, teaching and learning.

What is responsible AI?

Manish Parashar, director of the SCI Institute, said responsible AI is the simultaneous recognition of both the
importance of AI in tackling societal and environmental challenges as well as understanding and getting rid of the
issues this technology poses.

"However, AI has many important challenges around areas of bias, fairness, ethics and responsibility," Parashar
said. "We started thinking about how we can leverage this technology in a responsible way that considers these
aspects while simultaneously addressing important challenges to our region."

For example, Parashar brought up the possibility of using AI to tackle mental health crises. He said AI can gather
and analyze data to vastly improve an individual's mental health, but that this project will inevitably raise issues of
bias and privacy. The purpose of the Responsible AI Initiative is to solve these problems.

"Think of the issues of mental health ... There are many dimensions to the issue, including lifestyle and behavior,
and previous life incidences," Parashar said. "AI allows us to take our understanding of these different modalities
and use them collectively to address the problem. But you also want to make sure it's doing it in a fair way so that it
respects privacy and is not biased."

Why is the Responsible AI Initiative important?

"AI is a rapidly growing industry that will soon be involved in every aspect of our lives," said James Anderson,
researcher at the U's musculoskeletal research laboratory. "Even though I'm in biomedical engineering, AI is
already becoming a big part of my department."

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                                 U Receives $100 Million for Responsible AI Initiative

Whether it's at work or home, for an individual or for a community, AI has the "potential to transform lives," Parashar
said.

As an example, he brought up the issue of environmental sustainability surrounding wildfires in Utah. He said AI
has the potential to mitigate fire damage by combining data from the past and present to create the best plan of
action.

"You can use a combination of architectural aspects when fire intensifies, smoke behavior and local temperature,
combine these together and find which area the fire will impact the most and how to address it," he said. "The
potential with responsible AI is to minimize impact, create the right early warning systems, and know what
resources will be impacted the most quickly so we can tackle the problem early on and efficiently."

Who will be involved?

Parashar said the initiative is a huge project that will involve experts in multiple fields of work. These experts will
work together with students and the community to create efficient and responsible AI to address important
challenges.

"We will bring in the best experts as visitors, faculty and researchers," Parashar said. "They will create structures for
the students in different academic units and work as a team to address a problem."

Parashar said the initiative is geared towards the population as a whole, and he wants everyone to have the
opportunity to contribute.

For students wanting to be involved in the research, Parashar said "stay tuned".


Load-Date: November 22, 2023


  
