

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
     Biovista Personalized Medicine and Diginova to deliver next generation AI-driven doctor/patient support in a
                                      deal that can generate over $5 Billion.




  Biovista Personalized Medicine and Diginova to deliver next generation AI-
   driven doctor/patient support in a deal that can generate over $5 Billion.
                                            The Breeze: James Madison University
                                               September 15, 2021 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2021 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 569 words

Body


CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. and DUBAI, UAE, Sept. 15, 2021 /PRNewswire/ -- Biovista Personalized Medicine and
Diginova Health Solutions today announced their deal to deliver augmented intelligence -driven personalized
medicine analytics to over a quarter of a billion patients in Asia, starting in the MENA region. Diginova will offer
Biovista Personalized Medicine's market-leading AI Health ShieldTM analytics direct-to-consumer, where the
consumers are doctors, patients, their family caregivers, and national/regional health systems.

"We are excited to partner with Diginova on bringing our AI Health ShieldTM to a major part of the world," said Aris
Persidis, Biovista Personalized Medicine's Managing Director. "Diginova is excellent at integrating the right health
solutions for patients and doctors and has an innovation-led vision for the future of healthcare that is aligned with
ours," he continued.

"Outside of cancer, there were no AI-based solutions that could deeply understand patient data, including the use
of data to understand existing therapies versus unanticipated ones, until the arrival of Biovista Personalized
Medicine's AI Health ShieldTM," said Sarper Tanli, CEO of Diginova. "Biovista Personalized Medicine helps us
deliver high quality-analytics to our consumers for any real-world clinical scenarios they may be facing. We see the
AI Health ShieldTM as a real disruptor in the delivery of data-driven healthcare services," he added.

"We see this deal as generating potentially over $5 billion in new AI-driven service revenues over its current
iteration and lifetime," said Persidis, "helping us continue to engineer better healthcare for everybody's future," he
added.

About Biovista Personalized Medicine's AI Health ShieldTM: It compares a patient's current diagnosis and
treatment program against the many millions of evidence-based research reports published annually in scientific
journals. It then recommends either extensions or replacements of the standard of care when the latter fails. Such
augmented intelligence-supported analytics help physicians to adjust treatment plans and medications as well as
pro-actively "think differently" for patients in need. Going beyond AI-based systems focused primarily in cancer as
offered by competing personalized medicine companies, Biovista Personalized Medicine's AI Health ShieldTM was
designed from the start to be disease/therapy agnostic.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 2
    Biovista Personalized Medicine and Diginova to deliver next generation AI-driven doctor/patient support in a
                                     deal that can generate over $5 Billion.

About Biovista Personalized Medicine: The company is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Biovista, Inc., the award-
winning pioneer in AI-driven drug repositioning and personalized medicine. Biovista Personalized Medicine's focus
is the delivery of the class-leading AI-Health ShieldTM to consumers, patients, caregivers, doctors and health
systems.

About Diginova: Based in the UAE, Diginova advances evidence-based technologies and digital care models to
treat a broad spectrum of conditions, both chronic and otherwise. Diginova's multi-functional digital health platforms
include, but are not limited to therapeutic care, diagnostics, HCP upskilling and more.

Further information:

For BPM: info@biovista.com

For Diginova: info@diginovahealth.com

View original content to download multimedia:https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/biovista-personalized-
medicine-and-diginova-to-deliver-next-generation-ai-driven-doctorpatient-support-in-a-deal-that-can-generate-over-
5-billion-301376963.html

SOURCE Biovista


Load-Date: September 16, 2021


  
