

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                         2022 Underwriters Laboratories-ASEAN- U.S. Science Prize for Women




     2022 Underwriters Laboratories-ASEAN-U.S. Science Prize for Women


                                                       ASEAN Tribune
                                                   January 10, 2022 Monday



Copyright 2022 ASEAN Tribune All Rights Reserved




Length: 575 words

Body


 10 January 2022 (U.S. Mission to ASEAN) Today, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Committee on Science, Technology, and Innovation (COSTI), in partnership with the U.S. government, through the
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and Underwriters Laboratories, launched the call for
applications for the eighth annual Science Prize for Women competition.

The 2022 competition aims to raise awareness on cutting edge advancements by women in Artificial Intelligence
(AI) research addressing pressing issues in ASEAN communities. Candidates working in Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) fields will compete in one of two categories, mid-career scientist and senior
scientist, over the next several months. Underwriters Laboratories, a U.S.-based, non-profit organization dedicated
to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge, will award $12,500 to each category winner and $5,000
each to the runner-up finalists.

The theme Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Health and Safety underpins this year's competition, which can play an
important role in delivering better and more affordable healthcare services to over 660 million ASEAN citizens. In
addition, robust AI applications can strengthen environmental safety in the workplace, bolster security of industry
processing systems, and help address COVID-19 pandemic recovery efforts to deter future epidemics.

'Underwriters Laboratories continues to proudly support the work of women scientists in the ASEAN region through
the science prize,'' said Dr. Christopher J. Cramer, Underwriters Laboratories Senior Vice President and Chief
Research Officer. 'We especially appreciate the opportunity to recognize these extraordinary scientists as they
strive to harness the promise of artificial intelligence to safely and equitably garner long-term health and economic
benefits for communities in the region.'

'The United States is proud to promote, along with ASEAN and Underwriters Laboratories, women scientists that
capitalize on artificial intelligence solutions to counter the region's environmental, health, and safety challenges,'
said Rachel Cooke, Chargé d'Affaires, a.i. of the U.S. Mission to ASEAN. 'Through USAID's continued support for
this successful annual competition, the United States reaffirms its commitment to close gender gaps so that more
women can help shape advancements in STEM fields.'

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                      2022 Underwriters Laboratories-ASEAN- U.S. Science Prize for Women

ASEAN COSTI Chair and Deputy Minister of Science and Technology of Vietnam, H.E. Mr. Bui The Duy, conveyed
that, 'Research and work in AI by talented women scientists of the region will not only benefit the local communities
but will more importantly enable replication that will improve millions of lives within the region.'

Since 2014, the Science Prize for Women represents an ongoing successful U.S. initiative in support of ASEAN and
its 10 member states. As part of the U.S. strategic approach to the Indo-Pacific, USAID partners with ASEAN to
promote prosperity and security through economic inclusion, women's empowerment, and good governance.

To learn more about this year's competition and the application process, prospective applicants are encouraged to
visit the Underwriters Laboratories-ASEAN-U.S. Science Prize for Women website. The application deadline is
March 18, 2022.

For further queries related to the contest, applicants can email scienceprize4women@gmail.com and for public
outreach, contact jakartausaidasean@usaid.gov


Load-Date: January 11, 2022


  
