

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                                                  Ishrak-led firm seeks $750M IPO




                                        Ishrak-led firm seeks $750M IPO
                                                  Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
                                                    January 21, 2021 Thursday
                                                         METRO EDITION



Copyright 2021 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved

Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 407 words
Byline: NICOLE NORFLEET; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Medtronic interested in buying 1.5 million shares of the company, Compute Health.

Body


Former Medtronic CEO and current Intel Chairman Omar Ishrak is one of the leaders of a new health-tech
company that has filed for a $750 million initial public offering.

Compute Health Acquisition Corp. is what is called a "blank check" company, hoping to build itself by investing or
buying businesses that are "at the intersection of computation and health care."

Compute Health could start with strong ties to the company Ishrak led as CEO from 2011 to last spring. Medtronic
has expressed interest in buying 1.5 million units in the IPO, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.

Compute Health expects to sell 75 million units priced at $10 each and pursue an acquisition of a company,
according to the SEC filing. Advancements in data access and artificial intelligence are helping to push innovation,
the filing said.

Ishrak is chairman of Compute Health's board.

One of its co-chief executives also has ties to Medtronic, which is run out of Fridley. Jean Nehme helped found
artificial-intelligence startup Digital Surgery Ltd. and sold it to Medtronic. The other co-CEO is Joshua Fink, who
runs investment firm Ophir Holdings LLC and is the son of BlackRock Inc.'s Larry Fink, according to Bloomberg
News.

"We see the application of this growing computational power and AI to health care as ubiquitous, from the home to
primary and secondary care services," Compute Health

said in the filing. "Many companies and services have adopted mobile and cloud computing and are moving quickly
to computational intelligence, or CI, often at the point of care, or 'edge.' "

The company said it did not select any specific target business or have substantive discussions with any business
regarding a merger or acquisition.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2
                                        Ishrak-led firm seeks $750M IPO

Medtronic's interest isn't a binding agreement, but the company has increased the number of connected devices it
has introduced. For example, more of its cardiac and diabetes management products can now be remotely
monitored or programmed.

Geoff Martha, Ishrak's successor as Medtronic's chief executive, said last week at this year's J.P. Morgan Health
Care Conference that the pandemic increased demand for those products, and he believes it will continue. More
connected products are in the pipeline.

Ishrak stepped down in December as chairman of Medtronic's board of directors. Since 2017, Ishrak has also
served on the board of Intel Corp. and he is currently the chairman.

Nicole Norfleet · 612-673-4495


Load-Date: January 22, 2021


  
