

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 1
                                        Arunachal Pradesh gets second Yolo Health ATM




                         Arunachal Pradesh gets second Yolo Health ATM
                                                              The Sentinel
                                                       May 5, 2021 Wednesday



Copyright 2021 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved

Length: 273 words
Byline: Our Correspondent

Body


ITANAGAR: The second of its kind -- Yolo Health ATM -- in Arunachal Pradesh was inaugurated at the Changlang
district hospital by Deputy Speaker of Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly TesamPongte on Monday. It was
unveiled in the presence of Deputy Commissioner DrDevanshYadav, members of medical fraternity among others.

Yolo Health is a technology venture, pioneering in the field of health IoT. It primarily focuses on building remote
health monitoring and telemedicine applications.

Yolo Health has built its flagship product 'Health ATM', which combines instant diagnostics and telemedicine into
one integrated platform. It is an aggregation of USFDA/CE certified medical IVD devices and cloud-connected
backend. It enables paramedical professionals to diagnose several health parameters and diseases, bringing
technology enabled primary and preventive healthcare services near to the masses.

The system has a high-resolution camera and touch screen based kiosk and checked more than 40 health
parameters in a few minutes. Besides having option to integrate various invasive IVD devices, it has also integrated
medicine dispenser besides several AI-enabled health checkup solution.

The Health ATM is an aggregation of USFDA/CE certified medical IVD devices combined with HIPAA compliant
software backend. It enables paramedical professionals to diagnose several health parameters and diseases,
solving the problem of primary and preventive healthcare service in rural and remote areas. It is also a cloud
connected platform that enables telemedicine. It comes with an integrated doctor consultation platform with doctor
and patient login.


Load-Date: May 6, 2021


  
