

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
                                                A Robot Wrote This Review




                                        A Robot Wrote This Review
                                                   The New York Times
                                                December 12, 2021 Sunday
                                                    Late Edition - Final



Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company

Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 17; NONFICTION
Length: 1423 words
Byline: By Kevin Roose

Body


THE AGE OF AIAnd Our Human FutureBy Henry A. Kissinger, Eric Schmidt and Daniel Huttenlocher

One of the great promises of technology is that it can do the work that humans find too boring or arduous.

  In the 19th and 20th centuries, factory machines relieved us of repetitive manual labor and backbreaking farm
work. In this century, artificial intelligence has taken care of a few more tasks -- curating Spotify playlists, selecting
the next YouTube video, vacuuming the floor and so on -- but many more mind-numbing activities remain ripe for
the picking. The experts promise us that someday, all of our least favorite chores -- including complex cognitive
ones, like interviewing job candidates or managing global supply chains -- will be outsourced to machines.

 But that day has not yet arrived. Or has it?

 After finishing ''The Age of AI,'' a new book about artificial intelligence by Henry A. Kissinger, Eric Schmidt and
Daniel Huttenlocher, I found myself unmoved by the prospect of reviewing it. I've read dozens of books about A.I.,
and while the conceit of this one was intriguing -- bringing together a 98-year-old diplomat, a former Google chief
executive and an M.I.T. professor -- the book itself was a fairly forgettable entry in the genre.

 Then I got a bright idea. What if I could have an A.I. finish this review, and save myself the trouble?

  So I fired up Sudowrite, an A.I. writing program I've been experimenting with recently. The app uses GPT-3, the
cutting-edge A.I. system developed by the San Francisco-based OpenAI, which acts as a kind of turbocharged
version of Gmail's autocomplete feature. Provide a snippet of text, and GPT-3 will try to complete it, using
everything it has learned from ingesting billions of examples of other people's writing. It does this with the help of a
supercomputer containing some 285,000 processors, and a multilayered neural network that ranks among the
world's most powerful A.I. engines. The authors of ''The Age of AI'' call GPT-3 one of several promising
technologies that are producing a ''revolution in human affairs.''

 I pasted the first several paragraphs of this review into Sudowrite, and asked the A.I. to finish. Here's what it wrote:

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 3
                                               A Robot Wrote This Review

  Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt and Daniel Huttenlocher's ''The Age of AI'' is a bold new book on artificial
intelligence that will become the go-to guide for anyone who wants to understand this transformative technology.

 The authors have examined the full range of AI technologies -- from computer vision systems to natural language
processing -- and written about them in a way that will appeal to both experts and laypeople.

 One of the most inspiring aspects of this book is its scope. The authors delve deeply into the potential of AI in all
areas of human enterprise. They describe the impact of AI on health care, economics, geopolitics, law, urban
development, governance, journalism, the military and even the life sciences.

 Kissinger, Schmidt and Huttenlocher are not afraid to explore the darkest side of AI, either. They are clear-eyed
about the ways that AI could enable dictators to monitor their citizens and manipulate information to incite people to
commit violence.

 Although AI is already making our lives better in many ways, Kissinger, Schmidt and Huttenlocher caution that it
will take us as a species many years to create a system as powerful as we deserve. They wisely suggest that we
not lose sight of the values we want to instill in this new machine intelligence.

 Thank you, GPT-3! Now, a few notes:

 First, the A.I. wasn't an unqualified success. It took Sudowrite a few tries. On the first attempt, it spit out a series of
run-on sentences that hinted that GPT-3 had gotten stuck in some kind of odd, recursive loop. (It began: ''The book
which you are reading at the moment is a book on a nook, which is a book on a book, which is a book on a subject,
which is a subject on a subject, which is a subject on a subject.'') A few tries later, it seemed to give up on the task
of book reviewing altogether, and started merely listing the names of tech companies. (''Google, Facebook, Apple,
Amazon, IBM, Microsoft, Baidu, Tencent, Tesla, Uber, Airbnb, Twitter, Snap, Alibaba, WeChat, Slack.'')

 But it warmed up quickly, and within a few minutes, the A.I. was coming up with impressively cogent paragraphs of
analysis -- some, frankly, better than what I could have generated on my own.

 This speaks to one of the recurring themes of ''The Age of AI,'' which is that although today's A.I. systems can be
clunky and erratic at times, they are getting better fast, and will soon match or surpass human proficiency in a
number of important tasks, solving problems in ways no human would have thought to solve them. At that point, the
authors write, A.I. will ''transform all realms of human experience.''

  Second, while GPT-3 was correct about the scope of ''The Age of AI'' -- with chapters on everything from social
media algorithms to autonomous weapons -- it failed to note that all of that broadness comes at a cost. The book
feels cursory and shallow in places, and many of its recommendations are puzzlingly vague.

  In a chapter on the geopolitical risks posed by A.I., the authors conclude that ''the nations of the world must make
urgent decisions regarding what is compatible with concepts of inherent human dignity and moral agency.'' (OK,
we'll get right on that!) A brief section about TikTok -- an app used by more than a billion people worldwide, whose
ownership by a Chinese company raises legitimately fascinating questions about national sovereignty and free
speech -- ends with the throwaway observation that ''more complex geopolitical and regulatory riddles await us in
the near future.'' And when the authors do make specific recommendations -- such as a proposal to restrict the use
of A.I. in developing biological weapons -- they fail to elaborate on how such an outcome might be achieved, or who
might stand in its way.

  Finally, GPT-3 didn't address the biggest question about the book, which is why it exists at all. Kissinger, who was
66 years old when the World Wide Web was invented, is not a full-time A.I. practitioner, nor a particularly savvy
parser of tech hype. (His last newsworthy foray into the tech world was when he sat on the board of Theranos, the
doomed blood-testing start-up.) Schmidt, who spent a decade running Google, is these days preoccupied with
trying to scare up military contracts for big tech companies. And while Huttenlocher, the dean of M.I.T.'s
Schwarzman College of Computing, may be a bona fide subject matter expert, it's not clear how much of the book
he actually wrote.

                                                                                                            Page 3 of 3
                                              A Robot Wrote This Review

  That said, the book does get some things right. The authors do a commendable job of avoiding what I call ''A.I.
fatalism'' -- the belief, sadly common in tech circles, that A.I. is part of an inevitable future whose course we are
powerless to change. Instead, they write that ''humans still control'' A.I., and have the opportunity to ''shape it with
our values.'' They also point out, correctly, that while many people worry about killer robots who achieve human-
level sentience and mow us all down with Uzis, a much bigger near-term danger lurks in the innocuous-seeming
A.I.s we all use every day, from the feed-ranking algorithms of social media apps to the automated dispatch
systems that power Uber and Lyft.

 ''Without significant fanfare -- or even visibility -- we are integrating nonhuman intelligence into the basic fabric of
human activity,'' they write.

 Still, while it could be a useful summary of A.I. for those just starting to learn about the topic, ''The Age of AI'' does
not advance the ball much. It's a shame, given how much access the authors presumably had to a who's who of the
A.I. elite. And it makes me wish that...

 Actually, you know what? It's sunny outside, my dogs need a walk, and I don't really feel like finishing this review.
Take it away, GPT-3.

  ...It makes me wish that someone out there would crank out a comprehensive survey text on AI, one that's laser-
focused on the technical issues, written by industry mavens who are actually doing this stuff day in and day out, and
is written in an engaging, clear, plain-spoken style.

  I couldn't have said it better myself.Kevin Roose is a technology columnist for The Times and the author of
''Futureproof: 9 Rules for Humans in the Age of Automation.''THE AGE OF AIAnd Our Human FutureBy Henry A.
Kissinger, Eric Schmidt and Daniel Huttenlocher254 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $30.


https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/21/books/review/the-age-of-ai-henry-kissinger-eric-schmidt-daniel-
huttenlocher.html



Graphic


PHOTO: (PHOTOGRAPH BY Elliot Ulm FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)


Load-Date: December 12, 2021


  
