

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                             Recruiting Through Computers - Upcoming Virtual Career Events




          Recruiting Through Computers - Upcoming Virtual Career Events
                                              The Aquinas: University of Scranton
                                                  February 16, 2021 Tuesday



University Wire
Copyright 2021 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: CAMPUS-LIFE; Pg. 1
Length: 837 words
Byline: Kelsey Wynn

Body


by Kelsey Wynn | Editor in Chief

SCRANTON - The University of Scranton's Center for Career Development is encouraging students across various
majors to attend its industry-specific virtual recruiting events, offered throughout the spring semester.

Upcoming Virtual Events:

- WVSOM at University of Scranton Info Session

Thursday, February 18 - noon to 2 p.m.

This event will feature a discussion of the West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine unique program, setting
and history.

With questions or for additional information, contact Admissions Counselor Amber Sayre at (304) 647-6251. Visit
Handshake to register.

- Mayo Clinic Virtual Career Fair

Thursday, February 18 - 4 to 8 p.m.

"What if your career could change your life? Whether you are starting your professional life or well vested in your
career journey, you may wonder if you are aligning with the work you were meant to do. Mayo Clinic invites you to
register for the Mayo Clinic Virtual Career Fair!"

This is a free event open to all. Areas of interest include Finance, Coding, Supply Chain, Billing; Human Resources;
Research; Laboratory Medicine and Pathology; Surgical Techs; Facilities & Security; · Patient Appointment
Scheduling and Administrative Services; Environmental Services, Linen Central Services, General Services;
Nursing - RN Students/Graduates, RN Experienced; Nursing Support - LPN, PCA, HUC, NA, MA; Certified
Registered Nurse Anesthetists; Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistant; Pharmacy; Cardiac Monitoring;

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                          Recruiting Through Computers - Upcoming Virtual Career Events

Information Technology, Information Security, Healthcare Technology Management; Management Engineering and
Consulting; Charter House (Senior Living); and Center for Digital Health (Data science and AI in healthcare).

Interested students may register at careerfair.mayoclinic.org. Once registered, participants will receive a link to the
event page. No downloads or software required. Contact diversityrecruitment@mayo.edu with questions.

- Discover AlphaSights - Leadership Program 2021 Informational Webinar

Thursday, February 18 - 6 to 7 p.m.

"Discover AlphaSights 2021 is our first annual leadership program designed to provide students with an opportunity
to learn about our firm, culture, and people. This multi-day conference invites high performing students from across
the country to explore career possibilities at AlphaSights through attending interactive learning activities and events,
while also building a network with your peers and AlphaSights professionals. Qualified students will have the
opportunity to receive a summer 2022 internship offer."

This opportunity is open to "underrepresented minority students (those who self-identify as Black, Latinx, Native
American, Asian or two or more races)" who must be two years out from their intended graduation date. Interested
students should be looking for a summer 2022 internship AlphaSights' New York or San Fransisco office.

Visit the event page on Handshake to register.

- Hack the Technical Interview Workshop

Thursday, February 18 - 7 to 8 p.m.

"Join a team of seasoned industry experts and professionals at Visa as they demystify the technical interview."

Visit this event's listing on Handshake for access to external registration.

- PwC New York Metro Spring Info Session

Friday, February 19 - 5:30 to 6:30 p.m.

This session will feature New York Metro Recruiters from PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), who will discuss the
spring recruiting process, leadership programs and Lines of Service (LoS) and answer questions during breakout
sessions following the presentation.

Interested students may register at this link: https://tinyurl.com/y4fuhqsw

- Washington Internship Institute Information Session

Monday, February 22 - noon to 12:45 p.m.

Learn more about the Washington Internship Institute's program, where students can receive assistance finding
internships with nonprofits, federal agencies, and Congressional offices in Washington, D.C. University of Scranton
credit is available for these internship opportunities.

To register, visit the event's page on Handshake.

- PT, OT, & Nursing Virtual Fair

Thursday, February 25 - 5 to 7 p.m.

Chrome or Firefox are the recommended browsers for this event. Contact Kristi Klien at careers@scranton.edu with
questions.

                                                                                                Page 3 of 3
                         Recruiting Through Computers - Upcoming Virtual Career Events

Visit Handshake to register.

- Human Resources & Health Administration Virtual Fair

Thursday, March 4 - 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.

Please note that Chrome or Firefox are also the recommended browsers for anyone attending this fair. Questions
may be directed toward Kristi Klien at the address above.

Visit Handshake to register.

The Center for Career Development recommends all students attending virtual recruiting events dress to impress
and have resumes ready to distribute to prospective schools and/or employers.

To view a comprehensive list of virtual spring recruiting and career events or to register for an event, visit
Handshake.

Tags: campus campusrecruiting career careerfair education entry events handshake job jobsearch level link
newyork recruiters recruiting resume school scranton study virtual virtualevent zoom


Load-Date: February 17, 2021


  
