

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                          Google CEO Sundar Pichai promises to invest Rs 75,000 Crore in India




     Google CEO Sundar Pichai promises to invest Rs 75,000 Crore in India
                                                              The Sentinel
                                                         July 13, 2020 Monday



Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved

Length: 345 words
Byline: Sentinel Digital Desk

Body


Google CEO Sundar Pichai announced a $10 billion investment with an aim to accelerate India's 'digital economy'
in the next 5-7 years

Guwahati: At the Google for India virtual live-stream event on Monday, the company's CEO Sundar Pichai
announced a $10 billion investment with an aim to accelerate India's "digital economy" in the next 5-7 years.

Stating that he was "excited" to announce the Google for India Digitization Fund, Pichai said that through the effort
the multinational giant will inject $10 billion (Rs 75,000 crore) into the country over the next 5-7years. This, Pichai
announced, shall be done through a mix of equity investments, partnerships, and operational, infrastructural, and
ecosystem investments. The Google CEO said that this is a reflection of the company's confidence in India and its
digital economy.

Pichai stated that the $10 billion investment will seek to enable affordable access and information to every single
Indian by breaking the language barriers. He further added that India's unique needs shall be catered to by
"products and services."

The Google CEO expressed hope that the company's huge investment will also help local businesses to move
towards digital transformation, adding that it will also work towards using Artificial Integellince (AI) in areas like
health, education, etc.

An AI flood forecasting system that will help warn and evacuate areas that may get affected by the natural disaster
was cited as one of the examples by Pichai, who also enlightened about an AI-powered reading tutor app Bolo aka
Read-Along to help kids read and learn.

Citing a plethora of successful programs launched by the company in the past, the 48-year-old pointed to Internet
Saathi and claimed that it has helped over 30 million women across India to learn digital skills and incorporate them
into their everyday lives.

Lauding Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Pichai said that his envisioned Digital India mission has made internet
accessible to a billion Indians through "cheap smartphones, affordable data, and world-class telecom
infrastructure."

                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                    Google CEO Sundar Pichai promises to invest Rs 75,000 Crore in India


Load-Date: July 14, 2020


  
