

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
                                 White Paper Offers Ethics Advice for Government Use of AI




               White Paper Offers Ethics Advice for Government Use of AI
                                                 Government TechNology
                                                 August 16, 2022 Tuesday



Copyright 2022 Government Technology

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 592 words
Byline: Zack Quaintance, Government Technology

Body


Aug. 16—A new white paper seeks to help government and other groups build a responsible future for artificial
intelligence as the technology continues to evolve, specifically stressing the importance of creating redress
mechanisms that can handle flaws as they emerge.

Published by the University of California, Berkeley, the paper is titled AI's Redress Problem, and it joins an
accelerating, cross-sector conversation about how to ensure that ethics and responsibility are part of artificial
intelligence's future. Government is no stranger to this conversation, with New York City, for example, having
released a 116-page strategic vision for how to responsibly benefit from AI. This new white paper encourages all
stakeholders — government among them — to consider potential harm that AI can do, and to plan for addressing
that.

It was authored by Ifejesu Ogunleye, a graduate of the university's Master of Development Practice program, and
Ogunleye conducted this research at the Center for Long-term Cybersecurity's AI Security Initiative.

In a recent conversation about the white paper with Government Technology, Ogunleye discussed some of her key
findings, including the potential for incidental harm, often tied to data sources that have systemic or historical
inequity issues.

"By and large, I don't think you have companies or engineers sitting down and developing things they want to be
biased or harmful," Ogunleye said. "And if you have an AI system that is continuously learning, you haven't mapped
out all the ways it could potentially go wrong, either."

For these reasons, one of Ogunleye's key pieces of advice for government as well as private companies —
including vendors who sell to government — is the idea of redress mechanisms within AI technologies. Essentially,
what that means is that developers include mechanisms in advance that have the ability to stop harmful behaviors
that AI might develop. This, Ogunleye notes, is of increasing importance to society writ large as more sectors
become more reliant on AI, from health care to government to law enforcement to finance.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                            White Paper Offers Ethics Advice for Government Use of AI

In terms of the practical, the paper goes on to cite some government measures that establish redress mechanisms
in other technologies, specifically within data protection, those being Europe's General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and the California Privacy Rights Act (CPRA), both of which have been much-lauded by advocates for
ethical use of technology.

Higher-level legislation and regulations aside, there are things that lower levels of government can do in this area
as well. For all levels of government, Ogunleye advises that it is important for decision-makers to consider members
of the community as they make use of AI, and to do so in a meaningful way.

"The community is a very important stakeholder that the industry often hasn't kept in touch with or engaged with in a
meaningful way," she said. "It's not just about town hall meetings, it's about taking in feedback in a meaningful way
as you develop these systems."

And, to be sure, these systems have vast potential for government, with proven capabilities to automate tasks
formerly done by humans, improving governmental efficiency and clearing the way for real people to take on higher-
level challenges.

It is not, as of yet, a technology that needs to be feared. Provided, Ogunleye said, it continues to be deployed with
"the proper safeguards and guardrails."

___ (c)2022 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: August 17, 2022


  
