

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                        Lead into the future with clean energy - The Independent Florida Alligator




   Lead into the future with clean energy - The Independent Florida Alligator
                                               Gator Times: University of Florida
                                                  December 5, 2023 Tuesday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 691 words

Body


Recently the UF celebrated the opening of its largest and most sustainable building on campus, the iconic
Malachowsky Hall for Data Science and Information Technology.

Florida Clinicians for Climate Action sees much to celebrate. Not only is Malachowsky Hall dedicated to
revolutionizing medical, pharmaceutical and environmental engineering research by applying the power of Artificial
Intelligence , it was also built with sustainability in mind. By minimizing energy efficiencies, installing solar panels,
and utilizing other widely available technologies, Malachowsky Hall was able to apply for the highest sustainability
designation a building can - LEED Platinum. Should Malachowsky Hall receive that status, it will be the only building
on UF's campus to do so.

We applaud the aim of finding solutions to health and environmental questions so complicated many researchers
never dreamed of asking them while still recognizing the need to implement climate solutions today. As clinicians
already caring for patients suffering from the health impacts of a warming climate, we know the need is great.

While Malachowsky Hall and UF's supercomputer, HiPerGator, put UF on the world leaderboard when it comes to
accelerating climate and health solutions research with AI, one wonders why UF has still not publicly examined
how to supply energy to its campus as Malachowsky Hall does - sustainably.

The Rocky Mountain Institute recently published an analysis that shows UF could power its campus by utilizing
energy efficiency upgrades, solar panels and other well-established technologies. While that might sound expensive
to people who don't closely follow climate solutions, it would actually save UF money. A lot of money.

The latest plan announced by UF to supply its own energy - by building the fossil gas-burning Central Energy Plant
on UF's campus - is estimated to cost $115 million more than the RMI sustainable proposal. The significantly more
expensive price is just the up-front difference as it does not include the cost of the gas UF would burn in the CEP or
the health costs from burning fossil fuels next to where people live, study, and work.

Unless UF makes a commitment to provide the same dedication to sustainability it has for Malachowsky Hall to its
campus at large, they will be the very ones driving the climate, environmental and health harms the faculty and
students housed at Malachowsky Hall are working so hard to solve.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                      Lead into the future with clean energy - The Independent Florida Alligator

According to a study done by the Union of Concerned Scientists, decreasing global greenhouse gas pollution over
the next 13 years will allow Gainesville to avoid experiencing a heat index every summer so high it is literally off the
charts - 127 degrees. It sounds unimaginable, but this expected change to Gainesville's local climate is predicted to
start occurring in just over 10 years should the current trajectory of carbon pollution continue.

The data are clear: when it comes to preventing extreme heat in our lifetimes, the energy supply choices being
made today matter. Fortunately, not only can UF supply its own energy sustainably, it already has a roadmap for
how to do it.

UF halted announcements about the CEP after public outcry locally and across the state, and suggested they could
not change course at the time of the RMI analysis as the past president had announced his resignation and no one
had yet been hired for the position.

Newly installed President Ben Sasse has filled the role and can weigh in. He has already shown leadership through
his support of the sustainable technologies showcased in Malachowsky Hall and by supporting the environmental
and health solutions research being done there. He has a tremendous opportunity to lead on environment and
health by moving forward with a sustainable plan to provide UF its energy.

UF was recently named the #1 Public University in the United States by the Wall Street Journal. That prestigious
ranking is a sign of the forward thinking being done by this university's decision makers. The plan to power the
university using outdated and harmful technologies seems very much at odds with the visionary promise of
Malachowsky Hall.


Load-Date: December 5, 2023


  
