

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                     AI HELPING UPMC DOCTORS WITH TRANSCRIPTION




                    AI HELPING UPMC DOCTORS WITH TRANSCRIPTION
                                                 Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                                November 17, 2023 Friday
                                                   SOONER EDITION



Copyright 2023 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A-14
Length: 429 words
Byline: Kris B. Mamula Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

Body


Transcribing physician notes about care provided to patients was once a $12 billion business, with doctors' voice
recordings even sent abroad for conversion into written form that eventually made its way into patient medical
records.

That's all gone now with the advent of artificial intelligence in medicine, which has turned the industry inside out with
real-time capabilities of summarizing and structuring doctor-patient conversations into medical records and
diagnostic codes needed for billing insurers.

"We built generative AI in health care," said Shivdev Rao, non-invasive cardiologist at UPMC and co-founder of
Abridge AI Inc., a startup that converts voice into structured medical records. "It improves the care experience."

Creating medical notes after meeting with a patient has been a headache for doctors since there were medical
records. Abridge software saves doctors up to three hours a day in administrative chores, Dr. Rao said, giving them
more time to spend with patients.

"At this point in time, they need technologies to augment clinical care and improve the patient's experience," he
said.

The company, which employs about 50 people and generates undisclosed revenue, has offices in Lawrenceville,
New York, Boston and San Francisco. Abridge recently closed on a $30 million Series B funding round, bringing the
total amount raised by the company to $62.5 million since its start in 2018.

Some two dozen UPMC physicians in Eastern Pennsylvania have used Abridge to create structured medical
records from 10,000 doctors' office interactions with patients as the technology continues to roll out to other
hospitals in the system. In addition to UPMC, Abridge software is being used by the University of Kansas Health
System and Emory Healthcare as part of a partnership with Epic Systems, an electronic medical records system
outfit based in Verona, Wis.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                             AI HELPING UPMC DOCTORS WITH TRANSCRIPTION

The big advantage of the software is the time it saves doctors, said Salim Saiyed, chief medical information officer
at UPMC Pinnacle in Harrisburg.

"It frees them up mentally," he said. "That gives them time to really focus on the patient. That's just phenomenal."

Health care has been a tantalizing target for generative AI because of the mark the technology is expected to make
in everything from new drug research to primary medical care. In October, Highmark announced a deal with
Alphabet's Google subsidiary for Vertex AI Search software, which the hospital and health insurance giant said
would be used in every facet of its business, including doctors' offices.

Kris B. Mamula: kmamula@post-gazette.com



Graphic


PHOTO: Jessie Wardarski/Post-Gazette: A computer used at the West Penn Hospital School of Nursing in
Bloomfield.


Load-Date: November 17, 2023


  
