

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                               AIS Cancer Center gets $10 million shot in the arm in state funding




         AIS Cancer Center gets $10 million shot in the arm in state funding
                                                        The Bakersfield Californian
                                                    September 28, 2022 Wednesday



Copyright 2022 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.)

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 661 words
Byline: Steven Mayer, The Bakersfield Californian

Body


Sep. 28—It started as a dream that, 10 years ago, became a reality.

But Tuesday morning, as a crowd of doctors, patients and dozens of members of the community gathered outside
Adventist Health's AIS Cancer Center in downtown Bakersfield, the dream was clearly not finished.

In a significant state investment in local cancer treatment, Assemblyman Rudy Salas, D-Bakersfield, presented
Adventist Health with a ceremonial check for $10 million to expand the cancer center. The funding, earmarked in
the 2022-23 state budget, includes direct financial support for breast, colorectal, cardiothoracic and specialty care
cancer treatment at the center.

"I am thrilled to bring $10 million to help Adventist Health reach more people in our community and save more
lives," Salas said.

Few go through life untouched by cancer, he noted. His own family, he told the gathering, has been afflicted by the
disease.

"Cancer affects so many of us and our loved ones," he said, "and now we can serve more families closer to home
with specialized care, and better help those fighting back against cancer."

Daniel Wolcott, president of Adventist Health's Kern County network, said the money will help fund "the next
chapter in the growth of the AIS Cancer Center."

Bakersfield, he said, has grown to become the ninth-largest city in California, and Kern's population is headed
toward the 1 million mark.

"We're home to more oil, more renewable energy, more agricultural production than almost anyplace else in the
world, and we have so much abundance and so much to be thankful for," Wolcott said.

"However, this also is a community that suffers from some scarcity," he said. "We struggle with having enough
medical professionals to serve the people of this community."

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 2
                          AIS Cancer Center gets $10 million shot in the arm in state funding

And cancer death rates in Kern are "significantly greater" than across the state as a whole.

"There is work to be done to improve care in this community," Wolcott said, "and that's what the AIS Cancer Center
and Adventist Health is all about."

Cancer survivor Jessica Guevara is only 40, but the Tehachapi resident was diagnosed with breast cancer Dec. 6
and began treatment at AIS on Jan. 10.

"I really had so many questions, and I had so many emotions, and the uncertainty of how this journey was going to
go was extremely overwhelming for me — not just me, my family," she said of her husband, three children and
granddaughter.

But her family seemed to grow when she began treatment.

"Every step that I've taken, we've fought it together," she told the gathering. "It's not just about me, it's not just about
my family, it's about your team that you have here, and how important they are to you to get you through this
journey."

A major guide along that path has been Jacqueline Engstrand, ASI's navigation nurse who is affectionately known
as Nurse Jacqui.

"Every aspect of my life has changed in this past year with cancer treatment, but having an available all-hands-on-
deck team from the center has made that possible for me."

Guevara lauded the entire team, from her oncologist to her radiologist, her surgeon to the infusion nurses.

"They're smart and they're on it every day," she said.

The $10 million will make it possible to begin the process of expanding into the top two floors of Quest Imaging's
north building at the Chester Avenue complex, said AIS Cancer Center Director Jenny Lavers.

"When the Quest Imaging building was designed, which was a decade ago, they knew we would need space and
that we would want to have future growth," Lavers said.

"And as you can see, we intend to fill these two floors — which is 40,000 square feet of available space — with an
unparalleled coordinated care model for patients across Kern County."

Reporter Steven Mayer can be reached at 661-395-7353. Follow him on Facebook and on Twitter: @semayerTBC.

___ (c)2022 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at
www.bakersfield.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: September 28, 2022


  
