

                                                                                             Page 1 of 2
    DEC announces release of draft amendment to campground and day-use area unit management plan to help
                                       combat aquatic invasive species




   DEC announces release of draft amendment to campground and day-use
     area unit management plan to help combat aquatic invasive species
                                                    Register-Star (Hudson, New York)
                                                       March 2, 2022 Wednesday
                                                              Print Edition



Copyright 2022 Johnson Newspaper Corporation
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: H_NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 585 words
Dateline: ALBANY

Body


New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) Commissioner Basil Seggos announced that
DEC is seeking public comment on an amendment to the Campground and Day-Use Area Generic Unit
Management Plan (UMP) that would support DEC's ongoing efforts to prevent the spread of harmful aquatic
invasive species (AIS). The proposed amendment would help advance the construction and permanent placement
of storage facilities for decontamination equipment used to remove AIS from watercraft at DEC sites.

"Recreational watercraft are a common pathway for harmful aquatic invasive plant and animal species to enter and
spread in New York waters," Commissioner Seggos said. "The proposed amendment released today would
advance the construction of decontamination facilities at DEC campgrounds and day-use areas to help reduce the
risk of infestation. New York is a water-rich state with an abundance of lakes, ponds, rivers, and marine waters, and
it's critical that we protect these waters from organisms that have the potential to wreak havoc on these valuable
ecosystems."

AIS are non-native aquatic plants and animals that can cause environmental and economic harm and threaten
human health. AIS have been found in many of New York State's lakes, ponds, and rivers, and these harmful
species can be transported from waterbody to waterbody on watercraft and equipment.

Research shows that recreational watercraft are the greatest vector for transport and introduction of AIS throughout
the U.S. DEC manages 52 campgrounds in the Adirondack and Catskill forest preserves with more than one million
overnight visitors each season. The campgrounds and five special day-use areas at Lake George Beach, Prospect
Mountain Highway, Hinckley Reservoir Picnic Area, Fourth Lake Picnic Area, and Lake George Battlefield Picnic
Area also receive nearly 400,000 day-use visitors annually. Many of these visitors bring recreational watercraft to
the campgrounds, arriving at DEC facilities from across the state, U.S., and Canada.

Watercraft inspection stewards provide education and outreach to many boaters at DEC campgrounds. The
stewards offer voluntary inspections and boat washes using special decontamination units that have high pressure

                                                                                            Page 2 of 2
   DEC announces release of draft amendment to campground and day-use area unit management plan to help
                                      combat aquatic invasive species

and hot water to dislodge and remove AIS from the watercraft and trailers. Currently, decontamination units are
housed in sheds that are placed seasonally. Moving the temporary sheds at the end of each season is challenging
and can damage the equipment. The proposed amendment would advance DEC efforts to construct storage
facilities at campgrounds and day-use areas in the Adirondack and Catskill parks to store decontamination
equipment.

The draft amendment is posted on the DEC website at https://www.dec.ny.gov/outdoor/camping.html. Copies of the
draft amendment are available by calling 518-457-2500. Public comments on the draft amendment are being
accepted through April 2, and can be submitted by mail or email to: Josh Houghton, NYS DEC Bureau of
Recreation, 625 Broadway, Albany, NY 12233-5253, Email: campinfo@dec.ny.gov

DEC reminds water recreationists to do their part in protecting New York's waters from AIS by remembering to
clean, drain, and dry watercraft and equipment. Taking proactive steps such as cleaning off fishing tackle, removing
aquatic vegetation from rudders, disinfecting boat hulls and water compartments, and properly disposing of bait,
significantly reduces that risk. For more information, go to https://www.dec.ny.gov/animals/48221.html.


Load-Date: March 2, 2022


  
