

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                                             BRIEFLY




                                                           BRIEFLY
                                                 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                                                  March 15, 2023 Wednesday
                                                            Final Edition



Copyright 2023 The San Diego Union-Tribune All Rights Reserved

Section: BUSINESS; Part C; Pg. 1
Length: 433 words

Body


Markets

Markets climb: Stocks ended broadly higher on Wall Street Tuesday, as some of the most breathtaking moves from
a manic Monday reversed course. See story, C3.

BRIEFLY

Tyson closures: Tyson Foods is closing two facilities that employ more than 1,600 people in an effort to streamline
its U.S. poultry business. The company said Tuesday it plans to close its processing, broiler and hatching
operations in Glen Allen, Va., and a plant in Van Buren, Ark. Both closures are scheduled for May 12. Tyson said
the closures will help it better use all available capacity at remaining plants.

Eye on app: Britain's security minister said Tuesday he has asked the country's National Cyber Security Center to
review threats posed by TikTok amid calls for the U.K. to impose a ban on the Chinese-owned social media app.
Security Minister Tom Tugendhat said he was waiting for a review from the government's cybersecurity experts
before deciding on the "hugely important question." Prime Minister Rishi Sunak hinted a day earlier that the U.K.
could follow the U.S. and the European Union in banning the app from government-issued mobile phones and
devices.

AI inclusion: Alphabet Inc.'s Google unveiled plans to integrate artificial intelligence into health-related initiatives,
including an update on the use of language-generating technology in medical exams and AI-assisted research,
ways to help consumers find information faster via Internet searches, and tools to help developers build health
apps around the world. Google's health-related AI announcements come more than a year after the company
shifted strategy for its health efforts, moving to embed health care research and other functionality in its core
products.

Xbox game deal: Microsoft said Tuesday that it has struck a deal to make Xbox PC video games available on the
Boosteroid cloud gaming platform, its latest move to appease antitrust regulators scrutinizing its purchase of
gamemaker Activision Blizzard. The U.S. tech giant said the 10-year agreement would also include Activision
Blizzard titles like the popular Call of Duty franchise if or when the acquisition gets approved. Microsoft has been

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 2
                                                    BRIEFLY

announcing new partnerships as it tries to persuade regulators to allow the $69 billion all-cash transaction to go
through.

Digits

$8.1B

Amount the deal between private equity firm Apollo Global Management and Univar Solutions is worth.
Shareholders of Univar, which deals with specialty chemicals and ingredients distribution, will receive $36.15 per
share in cash. Univar will continue to operate under its name and brand.

U-T NEWS SERVICES


Load-Date: March 17, 2023


  
