

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
  Experts weigh role of AI in health care's future; From filling out forms to creating a treatment plan, professionals
                                         are eager to use new technologies




  Experts weigh role of AI in health care's future; From filling out forms to
 creating a treatment plan, professionals are eager to use new technologies
                                                   Crain's Cleveland Business
                                                          December 11, 2023
                                                            Print Version



Copyright 2023 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 1; Vol. 44
Length: 922 words
Byline: Paige Bennett

Body


As interest grows around artificial intelligence, experts believe emerging technologies could lead to big changes in
health care. Developments in AI could provide assistive tools to busy caregivers and allow for medicine to be
tailored to a patient's specific needs.

Conversations around the potential of AI in health care have gained momentum in recent years, but the concept
has been around for some time.

"Everything gets packaged as completely new, but, really, creating algorithms that do more consistent, better
medicine has been with us for decades," Dr. Paul Ford, who works in the Cleveland Clinic's Department of
Neurology. "It really has ramped up in the last five to 10 years, given our electronic medical record and the
increasing abilities of computer hardware to process things faster for large data sets."

Dr. Daniel Spratt, chair of the Department of Radiation Oncology at UH Cleveland Medical Center, said that
historically most hardware and software used in health care has been operated by humans, but that certain areas
have the potential to be standardized using technology.

"There are aspects of healthcare that should be very evidence-based, very algorithmic, very standardized," he said.
"That may not be a nuanced clinical decision whether to treat or not, but it may be once you've decided to treat or
you've decided to get a scan or to order, there should be very set processes and standards for some stuff to be
done safely and reproducibly and efficiently."

A lot of the recent buzz has been around generative AI, a type of technology that can produce images, text and
audio in seconds. This describes algorithms such as ChatGPT, an AI-powered chatbot that generates conversation-
like responses to user-inputted questions.

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 3
  Experts weigh role of AI in health care's future; From filling out forms to creating a treatment plan, professionals
                                         are eager to use new technologies

Dr. Nicholas Schiltz, an assistant professor at Case Western Reserve University's Frances Payne Bolton School of
Nursing, said generative AI has the potential to simplify routine processes in health care.

"Nurses, doctors, the thing that they're lacking the most is time," he said. "And so, I think this technology has a lot of
promise to automate some of the tasks that they do in terms of documenting."

For example, a doctor or nurse could use generative AI to create a lay summary of a patient's electronic health
record. Rather than having to search through a clunky electronic medical record system, the caregiver would have
immediate access to the patient's important information.

Ford said assistive AI technology could act as a sort of scribe for doctors, filling out electronic forms so they don't
have their faces plastered on computer screens during appointments. These technologies are the closest to being
ready to apply and implement, he said.

"I think that where AI and generative AI play a role is in being able to standardize and automate many things that
are done inefficiently right now, in a lot of different people's hands on various processes, a lot of handoffs," Spratt
said. "That should improve the quality, you know, reduce mistakes."

Schiltz said one of the key potentials for AI is precision medicine, an emerging model that uses a patient's genes,
environmental factors and lifestyle to curate disease treatment and prevention to a specific patient. Medications are
tested based on what works for the average patient, but that doesn't mean they work for everyone. Precision
medicine aims to eliminate that one-size-fits-all approach and get patients the right medicine at the right time.

"In order to do that, you really need large databases and representative databases so you can actually say 'This
particular treatment should work well for this patient because their genetic profile works well with this. They're a
good metabolizer of this medication, whereas some other patients, because they have this other gene mutation,
they cannot metabolize that drug,'" Schiltz said.

The National Institutes of Health has an ongoing research program called "All of Us" that looks to collect and study
data from one million people living in the U.S. in an effort to improve health research and individualized prevention,
but many groups continue to be underrepresented in this area of research.

There is also concern among experts that biased algorithms could worsen health disparities if not properly
addressed. Experts say it's important for researchers to evaluate their models for biases and not assume that a new
form of technology will work for an entire population simply because it has worked for one group.

If researchers can develop effective technology, AI may be able to help diagnose rare or hard-to-detect conditions,
Schiltz said. Some chronic conditions, like fibromyalgia, can be difficult to diagnose because they can appear as
different symptoms. Schiltz said AI may be able to help detect patterns that may otherwise go unnoticed.

In addition, Spratt said trained generative AI chatbots could potentially help patients move their appointment times
or answer basic questions about treatments or side effects. The technology could also flag questions that need to
be answered by a caregiver.

New forms of AI could serve as effective tools for the health care industry, but experts don't expect any new
technologies to replace or eliminate the need for caregivers.

"I do think AI will be an assist," Spratt said. "I view it analogous to the typewriter versus Microsoft Word. It's going to
be an assistant for a lot of things to improve efficiency, accuracy. I don't see it removing physicians, nurses. I think
there's still huge value of the human connection."


Load-Date: December 14, 2023

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 3
Experts weigh role of AI in health care's future; From filling out forms to creating a treatment plan, professionals
                                       are eager to use new technologies



