

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                                                       No Headline In Original




                                                    No Headline In Original
                                              Record-Journal (Meriden, Connecticut)
                                                       August 8, 2023 Tuesday



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Record-Journal

Section: RECORDJOURNAL; Pg. A007
Length: 397 words

Body


Artificial intelligence

From A2

partisan AI legislation in Congress, which Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said in June would maximize the
technology's benefits and mitigate significant risks. Yet the New York senator did not commit to specific details. In
July, President Joe Biden announced his administration had secured voluntary commitments from seven U.S.
companies meant to ensure their AI products are safe before releasing them.

Maroney said ideally the federal government would lead the way in AI regulation. But he said the federal
government can't act at the same speed as a state legislature.

"And as we've seen with the data privacy, it's really had to bubble up from the states," Maroney said.

Some state-level bills proposed this year have been narrowly tailored to address specific AI-related concerns.

Proposals in Massachusetts would place limitations on mental health providers using AI and prevent "dysto p ian
work environments" where workers don't have control over their personal data. A proposal in New York would place
restrictions on employers using AI as an "automated employment decision tool" to filter job candidates.

North Dakota passed a bill defining what a person is, making it clear the term does not include artificial intelligence.
Republican Gov.

Doug Burgum, a long-shot presidential contender, has said such guardrails are needed for AI but the technology
should still be embraced to make state government less redundant and more responsive to citizens.

In Arizona, Democratic Gov.

Katie Hobbs vetoed legislation that would prohibit voting machines from having any artificial intelligence software. In
her veto letter, Hobbs said the bill "attempts to solve challenges that do not currently face our state."

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2
                                             No Headline In Original

In Washington, Democratic Sen. Lisa Wellman, a former systems analyst and programmer, said state lawmakers
need to prepare for a world in which machine systems become ever more prevalent in our daily lives.

She plans to roll out legislation next year that would require students to take computer science to graduate high
school.

"AI and computer science are now, in my mind, a foundational part of education," Wellman said. "And we need to
understand really how to incorporate it."

Associated Press Writers Audrey McAvoy in Honolulu, Ed Komenda in Seattle and Matt O'Brien in Providence,
Rhode Island, contributed to this rep ort.


Load-Date: August 11, 2023


  
