

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 2
      Free-market health care innovations should be used to make lives better, not expand government power




Free-market health care innovations should be used to make lives better, not
                         expand government power
                                                    Washington Policy Center
                                                 September 28, 2023 Thursday



Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Washington Policy, USA All Rights Reserved

Length: 661 words
Byline: Elizabeth Hovde

Body


From improving diagnosis accuracy and alleviating burdens on health care providers to helping along the creation
of new, lifesaving drugs and expanding patient access to care, the integration of artificial intelligence has the
potential to transform health care.

The Biden Administration and Congress, however, are considering regulations that could stifle AI innovation in
health care. We need lawmakers to carefully weigh the trade-offs between regulation and medical advancement.

The following principles for any government regulatory action concerning AI in health care are urged by a group of
federal and state policy experts, including Washington Policy Center. (See the full letter and organizations on
board here.)

1. No new regulatory agency: We advocate against creating a dedicated AI regulatory agency in healthcare.
Instead, existing regulatory bodies should adapt their current authorities, such as the FDA's approval and
certification of AI-driven medical products, to accommodate AI innovations. Congress should ensure that these
agencies avoid regulatory overreach and, instead, focus on developing modern and agile regulatory approaches.

2. Safeguarding American sovereignty and intellectual capital: While international collaboration can be
beneficial, maintaining regulatory independence is vital to protect national sovereignty. Robust intellectual property
(IP) frameworks for AI should spur research and investments in healthcare advancements and bolster investment
while safeguarding American intellectual capital.

3. Cost-saving and resource efficiency: Government-deployed AI systems in healthcare agencies and programs
should prioritize cost reduction, operational efficiency, and the elimination of duplicative activities. Targeting waste,
fraud, and abuse in taxpayer-funded healthcare delivery and administration can yield significant resource savings.

4. Prohibition of government authority to dictate results or limit ideas and scientific debate: Governments
should not have the authority to dictate AI-generated outcomes in healthcare. To combat bias, comprehensive
datasets are vastly preferable to governmental intervention in algorithmic decision-making. AI should not be used to
stifle intellectual freedom, hinder scientific discourse, or suppress dissenting opinions. The ultimate authority for

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2
     Free-market health care innovations should be used to make lives better, not expand government power

medical decisions should remain in the domain of the practice of medicine, upholding the principle of medical
autonomy.

5. Regulatory clarity and simplicity for fostering innovation: Modern and agile AI regulations in healthcare
should prioritize clarity and simplicity. They should support innovation and AI technology development while
providing for patient safety, privacy, and ethical standards. These regulations should resist the influence of large
market incumbents and avoid creating artificial barriers to entry.

6. Embrace innovation in healthcare: The integration of AI in healthcare has the potential to create a dynamic
and patient-centered experience. It harnesses AI technologies to expand healthcare access, enhance outcomes,
improve the patient experience, reduce costs, alleviate the burdens on our healthcare providers, and drive
advancements in medicine. To achieve these goals, lawmakers and policymakers should meticulously assess the
boundaries of regulatory action, weigh the trade-offs between regulation and medical advancement, and consider
the consequences of stifling innovation, which would further limit healthcare access.

Congressional and state policymakers need to find constructive solutions to concerns over new technologies in
health care. If regulation is deemed necessary, it should be limited in scope, protecting patient safety and privacy
while promoting competition and medical innovation that can make people's lives better. Patient-centered health
care needs to be front and center.
  Sign up for the WPC Newsletter      Please enter full name      Please enter e-mail address




Load-Date: September 29, 2023


  
