

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
     Software developer (and other coding careers) Blockchain jobs Virtual reality jobs Big data analyst Content
                             creator AI jobs Mental health jobs Data broker Augme....




    Software developer (and other coding careers) Blockchain jobs Virtual
 reality jobs Big data analyst Content creator AI jobs Mental health jobs Data
     broker Augmented reality developer Drone expert/pilot Entrepreneur
                                                Chicago Daily Herald
                                                March 17, 2023 Friday



Copyright 2023 Paddock Publications, Inc.

Section: REFLEJOS; Pg. 23
Length: 1368 words
Byline: Futurelearn.com

Body


The world is evolving, and becoming ever more digital, but what does that mean for your education and career? In
this article, we dive into 14 jobs set to thrive in the future. So, whether you're fresh out of school or university, or
looking to switch careers, this article is for you. Discover which new jobs will be around for decades to come. With
your newfound knowledge, you'll be better placed to plan your education and training in order to reap long-term
benefits.

Here's to the future! Coding is fast becoming one of the most sought-after skills for technology companies and
between researcher groups. In a survey of over 500 tech workers and employers by Remote, 37% of respondents
said that software developers will be the most important tech job in the future. That makes software developers the
most highly-ranked job overall in the survey. The increasing importance of programming has caused some
European countries to add coding to the primary school curriculum. Reskilling to make this career change can even
increase your salary by 38%. According to PwC's Time for trust report, blockchain technology will enhance more
than 40 million jobs globally by 2030, earning blockchain jobs our number two spot. The future of finance is
definitely going to be heavily influenced by the rise of blockchain technology. Most people not familiar with
blockchain technology will have still heard about it – usually its association with cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin.
However, blockchains are not just used for cryptocurrency. They're standalone technologies that can be useful
across industries. They are already been used in the automotive industry to record the history of vehicles to prevent
seller fraud. Nobody will be able to lie about the car's mileage or maintenance when all this information is recorded
on the blockchain and 100% secure. If we had to choose an industry that's going to be booming for the next few
decades, virtual reality feels like a pretty good bet. The latest statistics show that the global market size of AR and
VR is forecast to reach $296.9 billion in 2024, compared to the $30.7 billion market size that was registered in 2021.
That's nearly a tenfold increase. With the 2021 announcement of the Metaverse, a series of interconnected virtual
worlds created by Meta (formerly known as Facebook), it's increasingly clear that VR and AR will be hugely
impactful in the near and far future. From marketing departments to video game developers, virtual reality is going
to be a cornerstone moment for the job market and the whole of society. The world of big data has flourished over
the past few years, and that's not about to stop. According to reports by Statista, the global big data analytics

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 3
    Software developer (and other coding careers) Blockchain jobs Virtual reality jobs Big data analyst Content
                            creator AI jobs Mental health jobs Data broker Augme....

market is likely to grow by 30 per cent by 2025, generating revenue of over $68 billion. Data analysts are going to
become the new leaders in the niche of business development. And they are already taking over the department
thanks to big data and the ability to analyse huge amounts of information for the benefit of their employers. There's
been a huge and undeniable boom in content creators over the past few years. But what exactly is a content
creator? This is a relatively broad term that captures anyone who creates content for digital channels. Still, the most
famous kind of content creator is the social media influencer – you can read all about influencer marketing in our
blog post. With more content being consumed daily than ever before – after all, global online content consumption
doubled in 2020 as a result of the pandemic – the demand for content creators is only set to grow in the future.
From fashion bloggers to true crime vloggers, the possibilities for this career path are pretty much endless. You'll
need to be pretty social media savvy, so check out our Digital Marketing Content Creation and our Instagram
Marketing Essentials courses to get started. You might also want to brush up on your copywriting skills. Artificial
Intelligence (AI) is much further along the process compared to virtual reality. With Elon Musk talking of putting
chips in peoples' heads to create superhumans, the possibilities of AI technology really do open your eyes. But AI
is not just about creating a new generation of humans. It can be about making functional robots and enhancing
business processes. The developments in AI are almost limitless, which means these types of jobs aren't going
anywhere fast. You may be thinking, if AI becomes better, smarter and more widespread, won't more human
workers be out of a job? However, PwC's study on AI found that "any job losses from automation are likely to be
broadly offset in the long run by new jobs created as a result of the larger and wealthier economy made possible by
these new technologies." Many people in society are working hard to reduce the stigma associated with mental
health problems, opening the door for people to seek help and use professional mental health services. But these
mental health worker jobs won't be going anywhere either. Just as people will always need doctors and nurses, we
will continue to need mental health specialists to help us get through tough times. What's more, skills gap studies
have found that mental health skills appeared in unique job postings 230% more in 2021 compared to 2016. The
recent pandemic, recessions, environmental worries and even a boom in remote working could contribute to further
demand for psychologists and mental health organizations. The idea is simple. These data brokers will be
responsible for facilitating business agreements between data companies and those who want to buy chunks of
data. They will make sure the buyer gets their data and that the selling company receives their money. All the while,
ensuring that the data is not shared further, maintaining the integrity of the new data market. The amount of data
online is growing exponentially every day – the current estimate of how much data is created per day is 1.145 trillion
MB – so we're pretty confident that data brokers will have job security for many years to come. Did you know that
the infamous Pokémon Go game was an April Fool's Day joke that went on to make an insane amount of money?
We're talking billions – as of 2022, the total revenue is over six billion US dollars. The reason for its success was
that it was entirely innovative for the mobile gaming world. Combining a franchise that millennials grew up with and
augmented reality was a masterstroke. Augmented reality changed the face of gaming and set a new bar, but it is
proving effective in other industries like fashion, where augmented reality wardrobes enable you to try on clothes
from home. Drones are becoming more useful and popular by the day. In fact, The Association for Unmanned
Vehicle Systems International predicts that by the year 2025, at least 100,000 jobs will be created for drone pilots.
Drones can help us provide medical supplies safely, assess building structures with ease, and revolutionise delivery
services. Drones are becoming part of society's furniture and are only going to become more present over the next
decade. With that in mind, drone experts will be needed to manufacture these machines, maintain them, and
arguably the most fun job of all – fly them. If you want to become a drone engineer or drone pilot, then we have
good news for you. Expect to see more of these jobs become widely available across sectors in the not-so-distant
future. It is, however, important to be aware of the challenges and legal restrictions surrounding drone use, which is
why our courses on drone safety for managers and using drones for security purposes might be useful to you. Don't
forget that society is more entrepreneurial than ever before. Fuelled by the internet and technological
advancements, the everyday person now has a better opportunity to start their own business or a small empire.
With further tech milestones being met, like those listed above, these opportunities to start your own business are
only going to get bigger. If you have an idea or business dream, there has never been a better time to learn the
entrepreneurial ropes and give your idea a chance to succeed.


Load-Date: March 17, 2023

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 3
  Software developer (and other coding careers) Blockchain jobs Virtual reality jobs Big data analyst Content
                          creator AI jobs Mental health jobs Data broker Augme....




