

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                  Meet the new vice dean and executive director of the Duke Clinical Research Institute




Meet the new vice dean and executive director of the Duke Clinical Research
                                Institute
                                             The Duke Chronicle: Duke University
                                                      June 3, 2020 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 494 words

Body


After a national search, the Duke University School of Medicine named Adrian Hernandez vice dean and executive
director of the Duke Clinical Research Institute last month.

In the new position, Hernandez oversees DCRI's research and teaching agenda, ensuring the Institute sustains a
broad spectrum of clinical research programs and trials. Meanwhile, he continues to serve as vice dean for clinical
research, a role that the cardiologist has held since 2017, according to a news release announcing his selection for
the DCRI role.

"When we reimagine healthcare delivery or research, you need to have the leverage to make it sustainable. It's
really through people, partnerships and platforms that I see DCRI evolving as I go forward," Hernandez said. "We
have an exciting group of these things at Duke that can change the status quo and make it better for everyone."

Even though Hernandez has stepped back from some elements of his role as vice dean, he has continued to direct
the Duke Institute for Health Innovations and will partake in the Medical School's leadership team for data science
and AI Health, the press release states.

In response to COVID-19, Hernandez initiated the Healthcare Worker Exposure Responses and Outcomes
Registry, which invites healthcare workers to answer questions about the impact of coronavirus on their lives and
participate in rapid-cycle research projects. One effort focuses on the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine in
preventing coronavirus infections in healthcare workers, according to a DCRI news release.

The $50 million study is funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.

"Healthcare workers treat and protect all of us from COVID-19. With the HERO Registry, we aim to develop better
measures to protect and support them," said Hernandez, who is principal investigator of the program, in the DCRI
press release.

Hernandez first joined DCRI in 2002 as a cardiology fellow. Before serving as vice dean, he was a faculty associate
director of Duke clinical research and director of health services and outcomes research at the DCRI. He became a
Duke assistant professor in 2004.

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
               Meet the new vice dean and executive director of the Duke Clinical Research Institute

The new executive director earned his medical degree at the University of Texas-Southwestern and completed his
residency in internal residency at the University of California-San Francisco School of Medicine, according to the
School of Medicine.

"Right now, COVID-19 has really disrupted healthcare and research as we know it, allowing us to reimagine not
only healthcare delivery that people talked about for years but also the importance of data science in understanding
biology," Hernandez said. "There are a number of different ways for undergraduates to get involved with medicine
whether that be understanding the biology, developing diagnostics, studying policy, developing therapeutics, and
learning what's critical."

Get The Chronicle straight to your inbox

Signup for our editorially curated, weekly newsletter. Cancel at any time.


Load-Date: June 3, 2020


  
