

                                                                                                              Page 1 of 3
                                     HIGHMARK HEALTH DIPPING A TOE IN AI POOL




                         HIGHMARK HEALTH DIPPING A TOE IN AI POOL
                                                 Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                              October 11, 2023 Wednesday
                                                   SOONER EDITION



Copyright 2023 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
Length: 986 words
Byline: Kris B. Mamula Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

Body


Visit your Allegheny Health Network doctor to talk over your medical problems and soon a machine may be
listening in, adding its own advice to what the physician tells you about staying healthy - stuff that may have been
missed in the conversation.

The "machine" is new software Highmark Health has been road testing - released for commercial use Monday by
Alphabet subsidiary Google - that carries the promise of dramatically improving health care and streamlining
Highmark's insurance operations. Google's Vertex AI Search is being introduced in virtually every aspect of
Highmark's business, Highmark Health's Chief Analytics Officer Richard Clarke said Tuesday.

"We are frankly deploying it across our enterprise," he said.

Ambient listening in doctors' offices may be a couple years off at Highmark Health's 14-hospital system of 2,600
physicians, but for now, Highmark is exploring whether the software's contributions to the doctor-patient
conversation will be in real time - like a third person sitting in the room - or sent to the patient after the visit by text,
email or patient portal message.

"We really see this as a multi-modality," Mr. Clarke said. "The current focus is really on actual medical
documentation," a physician chore that eats up hours a day and leads to caregiver burnout.

It's also expensive: Administrative costs rose $18 billion or 30% to $60 billion in 2022, according to the Council for
Affordable Healthcare, a Washington D.C.-based nonprofit.

Vertex AI Search is a generative artificial intelligence search platform that's tailored to health care and the life
sciences. It can also be tailored specifically to Highmark's purposes, Mr. Clarke said.

"We're teaching it how to speak Highmark," he said. "It's going to have a vey meaningful impact in the clinical
setting."

Google announced Monday that Highmark Health, the corporate parent of the Downtown-based $26 billion health
insurance and hospital system, had been among the U.S. health systems piloting Vertex AI Search. What

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                                 HIGHMARK HEALTH DIPPING A TOE IN AI POOL

differentiates the search engine is its heft in quickly answering questions from vast stores of internal information,
including doctor's notes, medical records and scans.

Mr. Clarke said the new software would be rolled out gradually systemwide, which patients and health plan
members might begin to notice in doctor visits and other interactions with the company in 2024 or 2025.

A small pilot involving automated medical documentation after the patient visit was underway using Vertex AI
Search, Mr. Clarke said.

Before Vertex AI Search, there was ChatGPT, a widely hailed artificial intelligence chatbot introduced in 2022 by
San Francisco-based OpenAI that can answer complex questions, and write poetry and answer user queries by
searching the entire web. ChatGPT ignited an industry rush to find commercial uses for the technology, with
medicine leading the way.

The technology harnesses immense power, providing transformative potential to change medicine.

"A single AI program can write as much text as all of humanity," former Google Health employee and serial
entrepreneur Mustafa Suleyman wrote in "The Coming Wave: Technology, Power and the 21st Century's Greatest
Dilemma," a book published in September.

Google's new search platform is designed to make medical information immediately available that otherwise would
be slow or nearly impossible to retrieve. The technology promises to reduce administrative burden and improve
physician efficiency, which Mr. Clarke said was a focus at Highmark.

Vertex AI Search uses an easy to use, conversational search format with machine learning that frames answers to
the individual user, with the software "learning" from each question. The tool will be specifically tailored to Highmark
needs.

At Highmark, Vertex AI Search was first tested in its strategy to transform health care, which it calls Living Health,
but Mr. Clarke said Tuesday that virtually every aspect of the organization will eventually benefit from the software,
including such far-flung departments as marketing.

"Artificial intelligence, including generative AI, plays a key role in how we are enabling Living Health and we are
interested in how Vertex AI Search could help us simplify the experience and make it more personal, accessible
and helpful for providers and patients," Mr. Clarke said in a prepared statement Monday.

Highmark Health has been a Google Cloud partner since 2020 when the nonprofit introduced Living Health. In
January, Highmark began rolling out the My Highmark app, which provides patients with access to information
about bills, insurance deductibles and health savings account balances along with medical history and treatment
information, which is the kind of streamlined access to patient information Living Health envisions.

Generative AI search tools have been tested elsewhere in drug discovery, breast cancer detection, surgery and
other areas, sometimes with notable results.

Among the more intriguing uses for generative AI has been in retinal scans, which have revealed not only eye
diseases such as glaucoma, but stroke, Parkinson's disease and heart attack. AI-assisted studies of chest X-rays,
the most commonly obtained medical image in the world, have detected Type 2 diabetes, measured heart function
and identified valve disease.

Rochester, Minn.-based Mayo Clinic, another health system trying out the Vertex AI Search engine, has been
using it to answer questions from large volumes of internally generated medical research, according to Dedaimia
Kozlovsky, a solution architect at Mayo Clinic.

Back at Highmark, Mr. Clarke said the new software would transform operations.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                                HIGHMARK HEALTH DIPPING A TOE IN AI POOL

"These are things that are going to continuously rolled out," he said. "We're just going to keep adding - every
quarter, every six months - we're going to just keep adding. Our focus is on creating remarkable experiences for our
patients."

Kris B. Mamula kmamula@post-gazette.com



Graphic


PHOTO: Pittsburgh Post-Gazette: Highmark Health has been road testing a new Google search platform - now
released for general use - that carries the promise of transforming health care.


Load-Date: October 11, 2023


  
