

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                          Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC Conference to highlight digital healthcare




     Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC Conference to highlight digital healthcare
                                                     Odessa American (Texas)
                                                      August 7, 2023 Monday



Copyright 2023 The Odessa American (Odessa, Texas)

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 639 words
Byline: Odessa American, Texas

Body


Aug. 7—Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC, a conference about digital innovation, will offer an immersive experience in
digital health using technology for access to care. The free conference, which takes place Sept. 19-21 at the
TTUHSC Academic Event Center located at 3601 Fourth St., is open to all clinicians, administrators, health care
providers and stakeholders.

The conference aims to demonstrate how digital health enhances access to care and solves rural health
disparities. Three goals of the conference include:

>> Exposing stakeholders to the broader goals of digital health at TTUHSC

>> Motivating stakeholders to go beyond telehealth and embrace the fullness of digital health

>> Celebrating and launching the Institute of Telehealth and Digital Innovation

"Health care in this region is a collaboration of many stakeholders," TTUHSC President Lori Rice-Spearman said in
a news release. "We're proud to be among those preparing the providers and delivering excellent research-backed
care, but we also want to identify and implement innovative initiatives that truly transform health care."

TTUHSC Executive Director for the Institute of Telehealth and Digital Innovation John Gachago said digital health
is all-encompassing and includes a variety of current and emerging digital tools to improve health care delivery.

"When we look at digital health, it includes all tools to leverage technology not only to improve access, but also to
improve health care as a whole," Gachago said in the release. "Some of these technologies are current while
others are emerging, such as artificial intelligence (AI), the internet of things and blockchain technology. If
leveraged strategically, these technologies have the capacity to enhance health care outcomes and lower the cost
of care."

TTUHSC's telehealth programs continue to bridge the barriers in the 108-county service area of West Texas
through new projects and innovations to expand telemedicine into most rural areas.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
                       Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC Conference to highlight digital healthcare

TTUHSC experts and telemedicine professionals from across the country will serve as presenters. Gachago said
the conference will educate, motivate and jumpstart stakeholders around digital health.

Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC will focus on three tracks that include: an introduction to telehealth; rural health care;
and AI in health care.

Panel discussions will include: How Digital Health Can Help Overcome Rural Health Challenges; Telehealth and
Organ Delivery Drone Project; and a TTUHSC Telehealth Poster Showcase.

Other presentations will include: Leveraging Technology for Access to Care; AI Can Help Rural and Urban; Mayo
Clinic and The Role of AI in Health Care; and Opportunities for AI in Health Care and Related Challenges.

Conference participants will have vendor opportunities that will be interactive.

To         register    for       the       Telehealth    Week     @                TTUHSC    conference,       visit
https://tthsclubbock.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_3juOAINoanOD52K.

In support of improving patient care, TTUHSC is jointly accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing
Medical Education (ACCME), the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE), and the American Nurses
Credentialing Center (ANCC), to provide continuing education for the health care team.

For the Credit Designation statements, please visit the conference website.

Separate registration is required for continuing medical education credits at

https://cmetracker.net/TTUHSC/Publisher?page=pubOpen#/EventID/37523/

Additional details, including speakers and agenda will be provided at https://www.ttuhsc.edu/president/telehealth-
week/.

The Telehealth Week @ TTUHSC conference is in conjunction with the American Telemedicine Association
Telehealth Awareness Week Sept. 18-21.

___ (c)2023 the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) Visit the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) at www.oaoa.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: August 8, 2023


  
