

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 17
                                           NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW




                                 NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW
                                                   Crain's New York Business
                                                          July 11, 2022
                                                          Print Version



Copyright 2022 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 13; Vol. 38
Length: 11009 words

Body


IN THE 19TH CENTURY the first fissures emerged in the old-guard conventions of the New York legal industry.

Katherine Stoneman and George Boyer Vashon broke barriers when they became the first woman and the first
Black person, respectively, to be admitted to the New York bar. Since then, the state's legal industry has diversified
year after year, growing to look more and more like the city it serves.

It is only fitting that a city with such a fabulously diverse population-58.7% people of color, 6.9% people with
disabilities, 5.1% members of the LGBTQ community and millions of immigrants-should be represented by talented
lawyers of equal variety. Indeed, the heterogeneity of New York's legal industry goes a long way toward ensuring
that residents of all stripes can find legal advocates and defenders sensitive to their unique backgrounds and
needs.

With this in mind, Crain's New York Business selected 80 Notable Diverse Leaders in Law. These individuals excel
in their practice at New York's leading law firms across a range of specialties. They stand out for their counseling
and the nature of their pro bono work. They likewise demonstrate a commitment to community service,
philanthropy, professional mentorship, and diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives. As diverse professionals in a
traditionally conservative industry, they are forging a path for others-women, minorities and members of other
underrepresented groups-to travel.

To qualify for the list, the honorees had to be nominated by their colleagues and based in New York City or nearby
counties. They had to self-identify as representing diversity in the workplace-including women, people with
disabilities, African Americans, Latinos, Asians and other underrepresented groups.

The nominees had to be serving in a senior role at a law firm with a staff of at least 10 individuals. Each was
required to be a practicing attorney at a law firm with at least 10 years of experience. In addition, the nominees had
to be role models or mentors or promoters of inclusive practices in the workplace. They had to have had an impact

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

on the types of cases they handled, their clients and their pro bono work. The nominees had be involved in either
community or philanthropic activities and diversity and inclusion initiatives.

Read on to learn how these honorees use their skills daily to elevate the legal profession.

ROBIN ADELSTEIN Global head of antitrust and competition, Norton Rose Fulbright

At Norton Rose Fulbright, Robin Adelstein develops global strategies and leads a team of nearly 200 lawyers in the
U.S., South Africa, Australia and Canada, among other countries. As the firm's global head of antitrust and
competition practice and U.S. co-head of its commercial litigation practice, Adelstein is committed to positively
positioning clients and ensuring their fair treatment in court. She has been featured on Global Competition Review's
2021 Women in Antitrust list and Crain's Notable Women in Law list this year and in 2019. Adelstein frequently
speaks at events hosted by the American Bar Association's Antitrust Law Section, the American Conference
Institute, and the Program on Corporate Compliance and Enforcement at the New York University School of Law.

MALA AHUJA HARKER Partner and management committee member, Friedman Kaplan Seiler & Adelman

Mala Ahuja Harker oversees Friedman Kaplan Seiler & Adelman's business development functions and its diversity
and inclusion efforts. As a partner and management committee member at the firm, Ahuja Harker focuses on
complex financial frauds and public corruption. She has represented the founder of WeWork, a major
pharmaceutical manufacturer and many clients in various regulatory investigations. Ahuja Harker helped lead her
firm through pandemic-related challenges. She was recognized in the 2021 and 2022 editions of Chambers USA
and the Legal 500 for her defense work. Ahuja Harker helps economically disadvantaged communities as a
member of the board of trustees of Volunteer Lawyers for Justice.

CARMITA ALONSO Partner, Fragomen, Del Rey, Bernsen & Loewy

Carmita Alonso represents a wide range of clients as a partner at Fragomen, Del Rey, Bernsen & Loewy, from
global financial services companies and technology organizations to small and medium corporate clients and
individuals involved in business-critical immigration issues. Alonso is charged with making strategic decisions
regarding immigration programs, risk management and compliance. As co-chair of her firm's global diversity, equity
and inclusion committee, she guides efforts to prioritize diversity in recruitment, education and career development
efforts. Alonso has supported pro bono efforts aimed at helping underrepresented immigrants of color. She was on
the board of the City Bar Fund for six years.

MERIAM AL-RASHID Partner, Eversheds Sutherland

As partner, global co-chair of international arbitration and co-head of the Latin America practice at Eversheds
Sutherland, Meriam Al-Rashid guides international commercial and investment disputes. With a focus on public
international law, Al-Rashid has worked with teams across seven countries since the pandemic and recently
created a charter for a new ministry to document war crimes in Ukraine. She investigated, analyzed and
documented human rights atrocities and genocide in Myanmar, leading to a recommendation to the U.N. Human
Rights Council that would establish an independent mechanism to collect, consolidate and preserve evidence of
international crimes. Al-Rashid co-chairs her firm's racial justice steering committee. She is a founder and board
member of the Arab Legal Forum. In addition, Al-Rashid is involved with Women in International Law, among
similar organizations.

JUDITH ARCHER Co-partner-in-charge, Norton Rose Fulbright

Implementing policy changes, integrating new lawyers, coordinating events, supporting staff-Judith Archer has a lot
on her plate as co-partner-in-charge at Norton Rose Fulbright. Archer oversees the firm's operations and policies as
a member of the management committee; she helped develop a flexible work program as a member of the diversity
and inclusion committee. Archer worked on a proceeding to recover hundreds of millions of dollars related to the
Bernie Madoff fraud. She was on her firm's attorney evaluation committee for nine years, overseeing reviews for

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 17
                                       NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

non-partner attorneys. Archer previously advised associates as the mentor leader in the firm's New York office. She
chairs the Women in the Legal Profession Committee of the New York City Bar Association.

JUAN ARTEAGA Partner Crowell & Moring

Juan Arteaga represents Fortune 500 companies and senior executives in civil and criminal antitrust investigations
and commercial litigation. As a partner at Crowell & Moring, Arteaga has worked with Samsung, Mozilla, CSX
Transportation and Blue Cross Blue Shield, among other high-profile clients. He co-chairs his firm's New York
antitrust practice and its diversity council, which develops and implements training and metrics related to the
recruitment and retention of diverse talent. In addition, Arteaga is involved in pro bono efforts for victims of domestic
violence, senior citizens, undocumented immigrants and indigent criminal defendants. He has received a Chambers
USA ranking as an antitrust practitioner, and he has been recognized by Law360 and the New York Law Journal,
among other publications.

SARAH ASHFAQ Partner Goodwin

Focusing on the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries, Sarah Ashfaq provides strategic advice to a wide
range of clients, management teams and boards. As a partner at Goodwin, Ashfaq represents publicly traded
biotechnology companies in Securities and Exchange Commission compliance and corporate governance matters
and represents investment banks in corporate, securities law and financing transactions. Ashfaq, who has
counseled companies such as Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Entrada Therapeutics and Nuvalent, provides business-
related pro bono services through her firm's initiatives in support of communities facing discrimination. These
include Goodwin's Neighborhood Business Initiative and Project Citizenship. Ashfaq is a member and a previous
board member of the Muslim Bar Association of New York.

LANDIS BEST Partner Cahill Gordon & Reindel

At Cahill Gordon & Reindel, Landis Best represents global corporations, multinational financial institutions and
media companies. Best's wide-ranging work as a partner involves government investigations, insurance disputes,
economic sanctions, intellectual property matters and appellate work. She is a member of her firm's executive
committee, and she chairs Cahill's Women's Initiatives Committee, overseeing a program that recruits experts to
deliver training and workshops. Best previously worked on the firm's diversity, equity and inclusion committee and
co-chaired its associate liaison committee. She has been among Benchmark Litigation's Top 250 Women in
Litigation for eight consecutive years.

MAYAN BOUSKILA Partner Helbraun & Levey

As a partner at Helbraun & Levey and chair of the firm's real estate group, Mayan Bouskila leads a team in
providing legal counsel to restaurants, hospitality groups, bars and developers nationwide. Throughout the
pandemic, Bouskila has offered legal support to community businesses, including supporting business owners in
renewing and renegotiating commercial leases. She previously chaired the firm's diversity, equity and inclusion
committee; she now mentors female colleagues through individualized coaching. Bouskila was recently a sponsor
of the Cherry Bombe Jubilee, a networking conference for female entrepreneurs in the food industry. She was
selected as a 2021 Rising Star by Super Lawyers.

SETH BRYANT Managing partner Bryant Rabbino

Managing partner Seth Bryant is responsible for Bryant Rabbino's operations and administration. Bryant places a
legal focus on minority- and women-owned business enterprise matters, and he was involved in a coalition that
advocated for changes to MWBE laws in New York in 2010 and 2020. Bryant is a founding member of the Council
of Urban Professionals, a nonprofit focused on diversity and equity, and he previously chaired a diversity-related
committee of the New York City Bar Association. Bryant was elected a trustee of the Citizens Budget Commission.
He formerly was on the board of directors of the National Association of Minority & Women Owned Law Firms.

ROBIN COHEN Chair Cohen Ziffer Frenchman & McKenna

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

At the insurance recovery litigation boutique Cohen Ziffer Frenchman & McKenna, Robin Cohen is involved in all
aspects of the firm's operations. She represents policyholders in business interruption cases. Her clients have
included Spirit Airlines, Pfizer and Verizon. Cohen, active in recruiting and retaining diverse lawyers, has written
articles for publications, including Barron's, and lectured on diversity at universities nationwide. She was on the
Insurance Coverage Law Center's editorial advisory board. When she was a board member for the Legal Help
Center, Cohen aided underprivileged women in the Philadelphia region.

DAVID CRICHLOW Partner Katten Muchin Rosenman

David Crichlow works on complex commercial disputes, representing American and European banks, major oil and
industrial companies, private-equity firms and large pension funds. As a partner and national chair of the
commercial litigation practice at Katten Muchin Rosenman, he oversees more than 40 attorneys in the U.S. and
England. Crichlow, who mentors diverse young lawyers at Katten and elsewhere, has led trial counsel on
commercial, class-action and bankruptcy litigation. He is on his firm's board of directors and executive committee.
Crichlow was named to the New York Law Journal's list of distinguished leaders of 2020. He helps lead a program
in the Newark, New Jersey, area that provides social and academic support to underserved male high school
students.

GABRIEL YOMI DABIRI Office managing partner Polsinelli

At Polsinelli, Gabriel Yomi Dabiri advises clients on buy-and-hold credit strategies and syndicated finance
transactions. Dabiri leads the firm's private credit and cross-border finance practice while he mentors diverse
attorneys and works to ensure inclusion in the firm's hiring, retention and promotion. The office managing partner
sits on the board of the Black BigLaw Pipeline, a nonprofit composed of senior Black attorneys, and has held
leadership positions as a volunteer for the American Heart Association. Dabiri is on the board and on the finance
committee of the Women First International Fund, which provides microfinancing to grassroots projects led by
women.

LISA E. DAVIS Partner Frankfurt Kurnit

Lisa E. Davis boasts more than three decades of experience representing businesses and celebrities spanning film,
television, publishing, music, theater and sports. Davis is a partner in the entertainment group at Frankfurt Kurnit, a
member of the firm's policy committee and co-chair of its diversity committee. She recently helped create a hiring
practices working group and organized anti-racism and anti-harassment training. In addition, she oversees the
firm's attorney sponsorship and mentorship programs. Davis, whose clients have included Black Theater United,
has received the Woman of Power Award from the National Urban League and has been featured in Super Lawyers
Magazine.

MYLAN L. DENERSTEIN Partner Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher

At Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, Mylan L. Denerstein leads criminal and civil litigation and internal investigations. The
partner and co-partner in charge of the firm's New York office also co-chairs the public policy practice group. In
addition, Denerstein is global chair of the diversity committee, through which she has led the firm's support for the
Equal Justice Initiative and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. In 2021 she was one of Benchmark
Litigation's Top 250 Women in Litigation. Denerstein is a member of the Women's White Collar Defense
Association, and she sits on the boards of the Legal Aid Society and the American Red Cross of Greater New York.

ESTELA DÍAZ Partner Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld

Estela Díaz provides guidance to companies regarding sensitive matters in criminal, regulatory and internal
investigations. As a partner at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, she has represented Morgan Stanley, Papa
John's and Starbucks, among other high-profile clients. Díaz chairs the firm's Latinx firmwide resource group, which
focuses on recruiting and retaining Latinx lawyers. She led her firm's pro bono partnership with the Bronx
Defenders Immigrant Family Unity Project, which provided representation to immigrants facing deportation. Díaz

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

was selected as a fellow at the Leadership Council on Legal Diversity, where she was on the program development
committee. She sits on the board of directors of Bronx Defenders, a legal services nonprofit.

KIM DOHYUN Partner Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom

Kim Dohyun, a partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, advises public and private companies on
corporate governance, acquisitions and dispositions, investments and private equity. Having represented clients
such as BuzzFeed and NCR Corporation, she is a lead attorney on Elon Musk's pending $44 billion acquisition of
Twitter. Dohyun serves as a partner liaison for her firm's global Asian American and Pacific Islander affinity network
and provides pro bono services to nonprofits, such as the DreamYard Project, which helps Bronx youth access
opportunity through the arts. She is a member of the Partnership for New York City's David Rockefeller Fellows
program, through which private-sector executives build civic leadership skills.

NICOLE FANJUL Partner Latham & Watkins

At Latham & Watkins, Nicole Fanjul is a partner and co-deputy office managing partner for the firm's New York
office. Fanjul oversees strategic planning for practice growth and development, large acquisition financings, lateral
partner hiring, associate recruitment and retention, and community engagement. She has lead anti-racism and
allyship discussions and helped establish a diversity, equity and inclusion working group to formalize connections
among various affinity groups and committees. Fanjul's pro bono practice includes advising on immigration matters
and helping immigrant victims of domestic violence obtain protections. She is a board member at the Acceleration
Project, a nonprofit that assists small and minority-owned businesses. In addition, Fanjul is an alumni executive
board member of Rye Country Day School.

MUHAMMAD FARIDI Partner Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler

Muhammad Faridi is a litigator of complex commercial matters involving torts and breaches of contracts. As a
partner at Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler, he has represented commercial real estate, software, pharmaceutical
and nonprofit organizations. Faridi, who has also represented death-row inmates, refugees and runaway homeless
children, focuses his pro bono work on assisting underrepresented communities in New York and the nation. He is
co-chair of Patterson Attorneys of Color, a firm resource group that helps attorneys of color grow and develop their
skills. Faridi is on the board of directors of the TEAK Fellowship and of the National Center for Law and Economic
Justice.

JULIE FINK Managing partner Kaplan Hecker & Fink

At Kaplan Hecker & Fink, Julie Fink leads a commercial and public-interest litigation practice and oversees the
firm's operations. Under her leadership, the firm has pioneered innovative recruitment methods to attract diverse
talent, resulting in the selection of summer associate classes composed entirely of female individuals and
individuals who are either people of color or LGBTQ+ or both for the past two summers. In addition, the firm has
filed a lawsuit challenging Florida's "Don't Say Gay" law. The managing partner is a frequent speaker on civil rights
issues and pro bono work. Fink led an independent investigation into gender equity issues in the NCAA. She is on
the board of New York Lawyers for the Public Interest. Fink was previously the audit chair at Gay Men's Health
Crisis.

DARRELL GAY Partner ArentFox Schiff

Darrell Gay is an expert on employment-related issues, including hiring and discharge, discrimination matters, labor
relations, internal investigations, workplace training, privacy and international labor. The partner at ArentFox Schiff
is the chief negotiator for his clients during collective bargaining sessions. Gay served as a member of the New
York governor's task force on sexual harassment, and he was selected as a fellow in the College of Labor and
Employment Lawyers. He was a commissioner with the New York State Civil Service Commission. Gay is a
founding board member of the National Employment Law Council and the Metropolitan Black Bar Association.

RACHEL GOLDMAN Partner Bracewell

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
                                     NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

Rachel Goldman is a litigation partner in Bracewell's New York office and co-chair of its environmental, social and
governance practice and pro bono committee. Focusing on the energy, construction, infrastructure and finance
sectors, Goldman is involved in climate change, social responsibility and social governance, among other issues.
She has represented wind farm developers and solar power energy companies domestically and abroad, and she
has advised large lenders regarding litigation and arbitration risks involving borrowers. As a member of the firm's
associate committee, Goldman provides mentorship and develops policies related to associate development and
diversity, equity and inclusion efforts. In addition, she coordinates the firm's partnership with the nonprofit Her
Justice. Goldman has taught at Columbia Law School.

ELIZABETH GONZALEZ-SUSSMAN Partner Olshan Frome Wolosky

At Olshan Frome Wolosky, Elizabeth Gonzalez-Sussman is a partner in the shareholder activist and equity
investment practice as well as the corporate-securities law group. Gonzalez-Sussman is on the women's committee
and the diversity committee, organizing networking groups that connect women in finance and law. In addition, she
is head of environmental, social and governance activist investing. She speaks and writes on ESG issues; the
Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance, a high-profile online blog, has published her work.
Gonzalez-Sussman has been acknowledged by Chambers USA and the Legal 500. She is on the board of directors
of the Columbia Law School Association, where she assists with alumni initiatives and fundraising.

KEISHA-ANN GRAY Partner Proskauer

At Prokauer, Keisha-Ann Gray advises companies, brands and individuals on various issues. Gray, a trial lawyer
who has secured victories in federal and state courts for organizations facing "bet the company" and reputational
risk claims, connects with diverse groups and advocates for clients. She handles sensitive litigation and workplace
investigations involving allegations of sexual harassment, discrimination and financial misconduct. The Proskauer
partner speaks and writes about trial practice and employment matters and mentors junior female lawyers and
lawyers of color. Gray co-chairs the Federal Bar Council's employment litigation committee. Recently, she was
appointed to the New York Mayor's Advisory Committee on the Judiciary.

SANDRA HAUSER Partner and head of U.S. commercial litigation Dentons

Sandra Hauser leads the U.S. commercial litigation practice at Dentons, serving on the global litigation and dispute
resolution leadership team. Hauser regularly defends companies in class-action and complex commercial cases in
trial and appellate courts. The Dentons partner is a member of the pro bono committee. Hauser has helped develop
the firm's business practices and professional development and diversity initiatives. Through Dentons' Preparing for
Rain program, which she helps to lead, she mentors young female lawyers on business development matters.
Hasuer is involved with the New York Says Thank You Foundation, a nonprofit that supports communities
recovering from disaster.

CAROLINE HELLER Shareholder Greenberg Traurig

At Greenberg Traurig, Caroline Heller focuses on complex commercial litigation. The litigation shareholder has led
the firm's efforts to train attorneys to file humanitarian parole applications and temporary protected status
applications. As chair of the global pro bono program, Heller oversees pro bono coordinators and mentors
associates. She is on the criminal justice and projects committees of the Law Firm Anti-racism Alliance and the pro
bono committee of the Advocates for Children board. Heller is president of the Holly Skolnick Fellowship
Foundation, where she leads selected fellows in work related to racial and social justice. In addition, she is on the
board of the Fund for Modern Courts.

MARCELLE HENRY Partner Pitta

Marcelle Henry, partner and chair of the ERISA/employee benefits group at Pitta, is charged with all aspects of
work related to employee benefit plans. Henry ensures that plans are compliant with applicable law and manages
more than 35 plans. In addition, she mentors female attorneys to navigate client issues and develop professional
pathways. Henry was appointed to the U.S. Department of Labor's advisory council on employee welfare and

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

pension benefit plans. For the American Bar Association's Labor and Employment Law Employee Benefits
Committee, she is a liaison to the Diversity in the Legal Profession Committee.

ELLEN HOLLOMAN Partner Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft

At Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, Ellen Holloman is a partner in the global litigation group, a partner sponsor for
the Black and Latino Association, and a member of the global diversity committee. She works with large companies,
banks, and broker-dealers, handling complex commercial litigation, internal investigations, corporate governance
issues and crisis management. Holloman, whose pro bono work focuses on veterans, immigrants and incarcerated
individuals, provides career advice to junior and midlevel attorneys. She sits on the board of New York Lawyers for
the Public Interest. Holloman, who has been named one of Lawdragon's 500 Leading Lawyers in America, is on
several New York City Bar Association committees.

MEEGAN HOLLYWOOD Partner Robins Kaplan

As a partner at Robins Kaplan and a member of its antitrust and trade regulation group, Meegan Hollywood
prosecutes actions involving price fixing, unlawful monopolization and anti-competitive practices. She leads a team
serving on the plaintiffs' steering committee concerning advertising antitrust litigation, and she is sole counsel for a
case involving two large freight railroads charged with price fixing. Hollywood, who is the New York office's pro
bono chair, is also involved with the gender inclusion working group of the firm's diversity committee. Her personal
pro bono practice includes working with the Kids in Need of Defense organization and the Transgender Legal
Defense & Education Fund.

BRIAN HSU Partner Goldstein Hall

As a partner at Goldstein Hall, Brian Hsu focuses on affordable housing development, banking, cooperative and
condominium law, and real estate finance. Hsu frequently presents on housing issues, including affordable housing
policy matters, and he has led workshops for the New York Housing Conference and the Local Initiatives Support
Corporation, among others. Recently, he helped close Habitat Net Zero, a project for Habitat for Humanity New
York City and Westchester that designs energy-efficient homes. He leads Goldstein Hall's developer program,
which aims to reduce barriers for underrepresented contractors and developers in the affordable housing
development industry. Hsu is on the board of directors of the Habitat for Humanity NYC Fund.

ANNIE HUANG Partner Robins Kaplan

As deputy managing partner at Robins Kaplan, Annie Huang develops solutions to help clients achieve business
goals and navigate complex legal problems. Huang represents companies in intellectual property and business
disputes and has experience in a multitude of industries, including consumer electronics, medical devices and
variable data printing. She has been on various trial teams in district courts and the International Trade
Commission, managing teams at all stages of litigation from pre-suit and case initiation to mediation and trial.
Huang focuses her pro bono practice on individuals seeking political asylum. She has been a volunteer attorney for
the New York Legal Assistance Group.

SHAIMAA HUSSEIN Partner Willkie Farr & Gallagher

Shaimaa Hussein represents multinational corporations and financial institutions in complex commercial litigation
arising out of mergers and acquisitions, corporate-control transactions and government investigations. As a partner
at Willkie Farr & Gallagher and co-chair of its mergers-and-acquisitions litigation practice, Hussein has represented
Men's Wearhouse and Xerox Corporation, among other high-profile clients. She is committed to hiring and retaining
diverse candidates, mentoring associates and organizing initiatives to advance diverse attorneys and staff. As a
member of the firm's pro bono committee, Hussein supervises work involving immigration and housing. She is the
recipient of the Federal Bar Council's Thurgood Marshall Award for exceptional pro bono service.

CORRINE IRISH Partner Squire Patton Boggs

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

Corrine Irish directs Squire Patton Boggs' pro bono practice in the U.S., Asia and several of the firm's European
offices. Irish, experienced in commercial and intellectual property disputes and issues of constitutional law, won a
settlement related to violations of the First and Fourth amendments. In addition, she obtained a pardon for one of
the four U.S. sailors, dubbed the Norfolk Four, who were wrongfully charged with rape and murder. Through the
firm's public service initiative, the law partner has handled pro bono matters involving indigent people with limited
access to legal services, mentored diverse associates regarding professional development, and advised law
students through the Squire Patton Boggs Foundation. Irish has been recognized as a rising star in New York by
Super Lawyers.

RANDALL JACKSON Partner Willkie Farr & Gallagher

Randall Jackson co-chairs Willkie Farr & Gallagher's white-collar defense and compliance, investigations and
enforcement practice groups. As a partner in the firm's litigation department, Jackson focuses on government and
internal investigations, civil litigation and regulatory compliance. In addition, he is on the firm's business, pro bono
and recruiting committees, and he is a partner mentor for diverse associates. Jackson previously was assistant U.S.
attorney for the Southern District of New York. He made Savoy magazine's list of the Most Influential Black Lawyers
of 2022. Jackpon sits on the board of the New York Legal Assistant Group, a legal services organization that
advocates economic and racial justice.

TALEAH JENNINGS Partner Schulte Roth & Zabel

Taleah Jennings manages all phases of litigation, developing strategies and overseeing the teams of lawyers that
represent her clients. As a partner at Schulte Roth & Zabel, Jennings chairs the firm's diversity, equity and inclusion
committee, and she led the formation of the firm's Task Force for Racial Justice. Jennings was awarded the
Sanctuary for Families' Excellence in Pro Bono Advocacy Award for her work in assisting victims of domestic
violence and sex trafficking, and she received the Burton Award for Distinguished Legal Writing. Savoy Magazine
named her to its Most Influential Black Lawyers list. Jennings is on the advisory board of Legal Information for
Families Today, a pro bono legal adviser for underserved families, and on the board of directors for Sanctuary for
Families.

M. JANINE JJINGO Partner Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom

At Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, M. Janine Jjingo represents investment and commercial banks, private-
equity funds, financial institution investors, and corporations in global financings, acquisition financings and asset-
backed loans. The Sladden, Arps partner has respresented Adtalem Global Education, BlackRock and Fintech
Bottomline Technologies, among other high-profile clients. Jjingo is involved in her firm's promotion efforts on law
school campuses, and she frequently speaks at Columbia Law School and the University of Pennsylvania. She is
on her law firm's Global Women's Initiatives Committee, which supports female attorneys. Jjingo was named one of
Savoy magazine's Most Influential Black Lawyers in 2022.

GLENN JONES Partner Abrams Fensterman

Whether at the federal, state or local level, Glenn Jones represents individuals and companies in various criminal
and civil matters as a partner at Abrams Fensterman. Jones chairs the health care fraud and white-collar criminal
defense practice group at the firm. His clients have included a nursing home and the board of directors of a drug
treatment center. Jones previously worked in the New York state attorney general office, where he was was special
assistant attorney general in the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit. He was a trial attorney with the U.S. Commodity
Futures Trading Commission. Jones, president of the board of directors of the Brooklyn Urban Garden Charter
School, has taught environmental law .

ATIF KHAWAJA Partner Kirkland & Ellis

Atif Khawaja offers strategic advice and litigation services for clients in business disputes as a partner at Kirkland &
Ellis, where he has spent his entire legal career. Khawaja's accomplish-ments include securing asylum for survivors
of domestic and gang violence and resolving antitrust and patent infringement claims. He co-chairs the firm's

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

diversity and inclusion and associate review committees, developing attorney affinity groups and overseeing pro
bono efforts. Khawaja is committed to developing a diverse trial bar and prioritizing diverse recruitment. He focuses
his pro bono practice on underrepresented populations, victims of domestic violence, disabled children, and
individuals with limited access to medical services. Khawaja volunteers as a director of the Legal Aid Society.

ALVIN LEE Partner King & Spalding

At King & Spalding, Alvin Lee specializes in complex commercial litigation, mass torts and class-action defense.
Working with clients in the financial services, energy and technology sectors, the King & Spalding partner has been
involved in litigation regarding renewable energy. These days he represents JPMorgan Chase in a series of
lawsuits related to the February 2021 winter storm in Texas. Lee has served in leadership roles within the firm and
throughout the legal industry regarding diversity and inclusion, leading initiatives surrounding anti-Asian hate crimes
and combating violence against transgender women of color. He previously was on the board of directors of the
National LGBTQ+ Bar Association. Lee has worked on transgender rights materials for the American Civil Liberties
Union.

EDWARD LEE Partner Kirkland & Ellis

Edward Lee has built a career advising public companies and private-equity firms on domestic and cross-border
mergers and acquisitions. The Kirkland & Ellis partner counsels companies on securities, corporate governance
and crisis management, helping develop the firm's mergers-and-acquisitions practice in New York and globally.
Motivated by his commitment to diversity and inclusion initiatives, Lee has pushed to organize firmwide discussions
and panels on related topics while he collaborates with leading Asian American and Pacific Islander organizations.
He was a 2017-18 David Rockefeller Fellow. Lee is on the boards of the Asian American Bar Association and the
Korean American Community Foundation.

JESSICA LEE Partner Loeb & Loeb

As a partner and chair of privacy, security and data innovations at Loeb & Loeb, Jessica Lee leads a team of more
than 40 lawyers who support companies, brands and media organizations in their efforts to use data to market and
monetize a range of digital products. Advising on technologies. including artificial intelligence, virtual reality and
facial recognition, Lee worked with Northwell Health on a deal with Aegis Ventures to develop and commercialize
AI for health care. She co-chairs Loeb & Loeb's affinity group for attorneys of color and ethnic diversity, sits on the
pro bono committee of her firm's New York office, and leads an advisory group of Loeb lawyers for the Bail Fund
Project.

KELLIE LERNER Partner and co-chair Robins Kaplan

Robins Kaplan's Kellie Lerner focuses on high-stakes disputes and counsels organizations in the pharmaceutical,
alternative energy and entertainment industries. The partner and co-chair has initiated antitrust class-action lawsuits
and recovered billions of dollars for victims of anti-competitive conduct. As chair of a group of women focused on
antitrust work, Lerner advocates for women and other diverse members of the legal industry, leading events and
programs that foster mentorship and inclusive dialogue. She is chair of diversity for the Antitrust Section of the New
York State Bar Association and co-chair of the National Association of Women Lawyers' litigation affinity group.

ERIKA LEVIN Partner Fox Rothschild

As a partner at Fox Rothschild, Erika Levin represents clients in complex international commercial disputes, serves
as an international arbitrator and provides transactional support. In her pro bono work, Levin represents people who
require additional support in understanding and navigating American law. Levin, co-chair of her firm's Latin America
practice and head of the diversity initiative for the New York office, establishes and facilitates formal connections
between minority attorneys and clients. She was named to Latinvex's list of Latin America's Top 100 Female
Lawyers in 2021. Levin is a fellow at the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.

LORI MARKS-ESTERMAN Partner Olshan Frome Wolosky

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
                                     NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

Lori Marks-Esterman chairs the litigation practice group at Olshan Frome Wolosky. As the firm's youngest person
and only woman to lead a practice group, Marks-Esterman has directed the firm's litigation practice toward subtle
and high-stakes cases in New York's Southern District and other influential jurisdictions. The partner is involved
with her firm's committees for women and for diversity and inclusion; in addition, she works with larger
organizations for women in finance and law. Marks-Esterman advances legislation promoting the involvement of
women and minorities in business while mentoring women attorneys on executive leadership responsibilities, client
obligations and family demands.

HAIMAVATHI MARLIER Partner Morrison Foerster

Haimavathi Marlier is global co-chair of Morrison Foerster's securities litigation, enforcement and white-collar
defense group. Serving on its board of directors, diversity strategy committee and New York hiring committee,
Marlier has helped develop a comprehensive training program for associates with a focus on thought leadership
and the inclusion of first-generation law students from non-elite schools. Her pro bono practice focuses on
increasing marginalized communities' access to nature and public lands. In addition, Marlier mentors aspiring
lawyers of color. The law firm partner, who served on the Securities and Exchange Commission's Division of
Enforcement, has received accolades from the Legal 500. Marlier is on the board of trustees of the SEC Historical
Society.

LINDA MARTIN Partner Freshfields

At Freshfields, partner Linda Martin is co-head of its U.S. commercial litigation practice and co-head of its global
class and collective actions group. Martin, a leader in diversity and inclusion, has been recognized for her work by
Crain's, Benchmark Litigation and Chambers, among others. In her pro bono work, Martin defeated a motion in
2021 to dismiss civil rights litigation filed by a client brutalized during an arrest. She hosts periodic "Zoomside
Chats" with female partners to share professional guidance, and she has participated in Freshfields' Reverse
Mentoring Program, which pairs the firm's leaders with diverse associates. Martin has been a board member of the
Children's Tumor Foundation since 2006.

WALFRIDO MARTINEZ Managing partner Hunton Andrews Kurth

Since Walfrido Martinez became a managing partner at Hunton Andrews Kurth in 2006-one of the youngest leaders
of the global law firm and the rare Hispanic American in the role-the firm has engaged 100% of its lawyers in
diversity and inclusion initiatives and projects and in its pro bono services. As a previous chair of the Leadership
Council on Legal Diversity, Martinez developed a diverse team of office, practice and committee leaders, engaged
proactively with diverse attorneys and supported programs that facilitate productive discussion. Martinez, a
specialist in complex business litigation and white-collar criminal defense, has been recognized by the National Law
Journal. He received the U.S. Coast Guard's Meritorious Public Service Award in 2017.

BRIAN McGRATH Partner Hinshaw & Culbertson

Hinshaw & Culbertson partner Brian McGrath co-chairs the firm's consumer financial services practice group.
McGrath represents and advises major companies nationwide, manages a high-volume litigation practice and has
led large scale attorney-recruitment efforts. As a recognized thought leader on state and federal financial services
laws, he is a legal resource for the New York Mortgage Bankers Association, where is on the mortgage servicing
committee. McGrath, who has been consistently involved with LGBTQ issues, has held leadership roles for the New
York City Bar LGBTQ Rights Committee, and he is a member of the Human Rights Campaign Federal Club
Council. McGrath was a 2018-19 fellow at the Leadership Council on Legal Diversity. He is on the board of the
Development Authority of the North Country, a public benefit corporation.

JOSEPH MILIZIO Managing partner Vishnick McGovern Milizio

Joseph Milizio oversees all aspects of operations and growth at Vishnick McGovern Milizio, leading the firm's
practices in LGBTQ representation, business and transactional law, mergers and acquisitions and real estate. The
managing partner recently represented LGBTQ clients in connection with estate planning, health care

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

discrimination and surrogacy. In his community work, Milizio has collaborated with Northwell Health to run a
yearlong LGBTQ Health & Life Planning webinar series and to establish an upcoming free medical-legal clinic for
transgender people. In 2021 Milizio co-founded the Long Island chapter of the LGBT Chamber of Commerce and
joined the national board of governors of the Human Rights Campaign.

MORGAN F. MOUCHETTE Partner Blank Rome

Blank Rome partner Morgan F. Mouchette handles and settles high-net-worth financial, matrimonial and family
matters. After representing a female Army veteran in a custody battle upon her return from the Iraq War, Mouchette
received Blank Rome's highest pro bono honor in 2015. She has been recognized by the New York Law Journal,
Super Lawyers and the Women's Bar Association of the State of New York. She co-chairs Blank Rome's United
Affinity Group and frequently lectures on mentorship and authenticity. Mouchette, who is focused on increasing
diversity in the legal community, holds a leadership position at Black BigLaw Pipeline, a mentorship group for Black
attorneys.

TREY MULDROW Partner Weil, Gotshal & Manges

At Weil, Gotshal & Manges, Trey Muldrow advises corporations, sovereign wealth groups, private-equity sponsors
and assent managers on complex and market-leading transactions. Muldrow, a partner in the private-equity
practice, has worked with the New York Yankees, Northleaf Capital and Siemens, among other major clients. He
has been recognized by the Metropolitan Black Bar Association, the Council of Urban Professionals and Bloomberg
Law. Muldrow is a leader in his firm's Black Attorney Affinity Group and a participant in Jumpstart, a mentoring
program for Black associates. Active in diversity recruiting, he helped revive the Black alumni program and launch a
microsite to showcase Black partner talent to clients and law students.

BONNIE NEUMAN Co-chair of the finance group Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft

Bonnie Neuman, a recognized leader in real estate finance law, has headed multiple headline transactions and
leads a transatlantic team of more than 100 attorneys. Neuman is a co-chair of the finance group, the head of the
real estate finance practice and a member of the management committee at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft,
where she has spent her entire legal career. Neuman's pro bono work includes involvement with her firm's
Transgender Name Change Clinic and Immigration Clinic. She is a committed leader on diversity and inclusion
initiatives, including the firm's sponsorship program and the CRE Finance Council Women's Network, where she
raises funds for Girls Inc., a nonprofit that focuses on female empowerment. Neuman was recognized in 2021 as
one of the nation's top commercial real estate attorneys by Connect CRE.

JESSE NEVAREZ Partner Goodwin

Goodwin partner Jesse Nevarez uses a client-centered approach to advise companies on capital markets, complex
transactions, and mergers and acquisitions in the technology and life sciences sectors. Nevarez, who provides
counsel for matters throughout the corporate lifecycle, ensures equal opportunity in all aspects of his professional
life. He accomplishes this through mentoring associates and law students, working with venture capitalists and
incubators that invest in women- and minority-owned companies and serving as a Leadership Council on Legal
Diversity fellow. Nevarez is active on Goodwin's Black Anti-racism Task Force, a leader on the New York Council of
its Committee on Racial and Ethnic Diversity, and a diversity, equity and inclusion co-chair for its tech business unit.

INOSI NYATTA Partner Sullivan & Cromwell

As co-head of Sullivan and Cromwell's global project development and finance practice, Inosi Nyatta works on
innovative financing techniques that provide infrastructure to developing regions. Recently, she advised Belize on a
restructuring project to support ocean conservation and represented Sempra and Sempra Infrastructure Partners in
financing efforts to build capital and credit. As a member of her firm's diversity and women's initiative committees,
Nyatta has co-founded and launched initiatives to promote female colleagues, cultivate an alumni network and
provide career mentorship. The law partner delivered a virtual training session on financial models for energy

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

products for government lawyers and officials in Nigeria, Kenya and Ethiopia through the Cyrus R. Vance Center for
International Justice.

MARY POKOJNY O'REILLY Partner Meltzer, Lippe, Goldstein & Breitstone

As a co-chair of the trusts and estates practice group of Meltzer, Lippe, Goldstein & Breitstone, Mary Pokojny
O'Reilly manages, counsels and mentors a team of 25 estate-planning attorneys across the country. O'Reilly, the
first female equity partner at her firm, guides individuals and family businesses on preserving and protecting assets
and minimizing taxes. Committed to mentorship, she advises dozens of young attorneys at the firm, emphasizing
the path to success for other working parents. O'Reilly participates in the American Bar Association and sits on the
board of Our Lady Victory School. She has planned professional development events in concert with the Hofstra
University School of law.

KRISHNAN PADMANABHAN Partner Winston & Strawn

At Winston & Strawn, partner Krishnan Padmanabhan co-chairs the firm's technology, media and telecom industry
group. With extensive experience in patent litigation, Padmanabhan promotes diversity, equity and inclusion efforts
through his position on Winston's executive committee and as the diversity committee liaison to the attorney
assignment committee. He has been recognized for his work by the Legal 500, Super Lawyers and IAM Patent
1000. Outside of the firm, Padmanabhan sits on the board of governors of the University of California, Hastings
College of Law as a mentor to diverse students. In addition, he is on the Edgemont Scholarship Council, which
grants scholarships to students in need of financial aid.

CARMEN I. PAGAN Partner Romer Debbas

As head of Romer Debbas' agency lending practice-a diverse and all-female department-partner Carmen I. Pagan
helps clients navigate complex multifamily lending matters, including conventional loans, senior housing and
student housing. Pagan has spoken at global real estate forums and legal conferences, and she hosted the
"Diversity and Inclusion in Institutional Real Estate" networking roundtable at the seventh annual Global Institutional
Real Estate Investor Forum. Pagan, who is committed to diversity and inclusion in the workplace, is an active
career mentor. She represents immigrants in pro bono cases regarding petitions to obtain legal permanent status
and regularly counsels military veterans, senior citizens and minority business owners.

ALI PANJWANI Partner Pryor Cashman

At Pryor Cashman, Ali Panjwani provides transactional advice to small- and mid-cap companies, investment banks
and funds. As a co-chair and assigning partner of the firm's corporate group, Panjwani shapes associates'
professional development, ensures corporate team engagement and mentors diverse associates. He led the initial
public offering for the first minority-led special-purpose acquisition company to be listed on the Nasdaq and has
represented Crown Electrokinetics, a smart-glass technology company that offers carbon emissions-reduction
benefits. Panjwani is a member of his firm's summer associate hiring committee, which supports diversity-a cause
of importance to him as a first-generation American. Panjwani holds frequent informal mentoring conversations with
young people and has hosted high school students at Pryor Cashman through the Elevate New York program.

LUIS PENALVER Partner Cahill Gordon & Reindel

Cahill Gordon & Reindel partner Luis Penalver represents leading global banks involved in leveraged buyouts
across a wide range of industries. Penalver sits on the firm's executive committee and provides counsel on the
long-term strategic direction and day-to-day management of the firm. In addition, he chairs Cahill's diversity and
inclusion committee, which he has served on since its inception, and supervises firmwide efforts in setting and
achieving internal goals for diverse recruiting, retention, promotion and mentorship. Outside of work, Penalver, a
longtime board member of the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund, chairs its pension committee.

SHIVANI PODDAR Partner Herrick, Feinstein

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
                                     NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

For more than a decade, Shivani Poddar has worked with clients in high-profile cases, including commercial,
securities, real estate and employment disputes. The Herrick, Feinstein partner has represented the trustee of an
energy company in a large leveraged buyout as well as Ample Hills Holdings, the iconic Brooklyn-based ice-cream
company, in Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection proceedings. Poddar, founder of the Diverse Working Attorneys'
Group and creator of the newsletter Diversity Matters, has launched programs aimed at increasing her firm's efforts
in recruiting and retaining diverse attorneys. She was recognized as a rising star by the New YorkLaw Journal in
2020. Poddar is co-director of the litigation committee of the South Asian Bar Association in New York.

EDWARD PROKOP Partner Jenner & Block

As co-chair of the firm's corporate department and cross-border transaction practice, Jenner & Block partner
Edward Prokop counsels clients in domestic and international transactions, corporate governance, fiduciary, ethics
and disclosure issues. Prokop co-led a team that represented Snyder's-Lance in Campbell Soup Company's
multibillion-dollar acquisition of the snack manufacturer. He is an active member of Jenner & Block's diversity and
inclusion committee and co-chair of the firm's multicultural affinity group. In addition, Prokop is on the New York
office's summer associate committee. He mentors law school fellows from underrepresented backgrounds and is
himself a fellow with the Leadership Council on Legal Diversity. Prokop's pro bono work focuses on prison
education, renewable energy and public school equity.

DOROTHEA REGAL Founding and co-managing partner Hoguet Newman Regal & Kenney

Since co-founding the women-owned litigation boutique Hoguet Newman Regal & Kenney more than a quarter-
century ago, Dorothea Regal has recovered hundreds of millions of dollars from insurers for various corporate
policyholders. As a co-managing partner, she heads the firm's insurance recovery group and has represented
global companies in disputes that include product liability claims, insurance coverage, business interruption and
employment discrimination. Regal, who mentors interns, associates and younger partners, is involved with the
Women's Leadership Circle of Brooklyn Law School, a program aimed at advancing women lawyers. She is the
policyholder-side co-chair of the Business Interruption Insurance Subcommittee of the American Bar Association's
Insurance Coverage Litigation Committee.

ANN RICHARDSON KNOX Partner Mayer Brown

Ann Richardson Knox, who represents large domestic and international lenders in fund finance matters, led some of
the first environmental, social and governance and green fund financings on the U.S. market. Richardson Knox
heads the firm's global fund finance team and serves as a banking and finance partner at the New York office. She
has supported women through the founding of the Women in Fund Finance initiative, which aims to increase the
engagement, recognition and promotion of women leaders in alternative investment fund finance. At numerous
events for the Fund Finance initiative and other financial organizations, Richardson Knox has given presentations
and facilitated industry discussion, with special attention to addressing audiences of female lawyers.

NINA ROKET Co-administrative partner Olshan Frome Wolosky

As leader of the commercial leasing practice at Olshan Frome Wolosky, Nina Roket closes leases, acquisitions and
financings while she develops new businesses. With her experience in real estate and business, Roket works with a
diverse roster of clients, leading national and global financing platforms in office, retail and bio-manufacturing
spaces. The founder and chair of the firm's women's committee mentors female lawyers; she also mentors in the
Urban Land Institute Mentorship Program. Olshan's co-administrative partner is a member of WX New York Women
Executives in Real Estate. Roket, committed to advancing principles of diversity and inclusion, heads the law firm's
hiring committee.

ANJAN SAHNI Partner-in-charge, New York office WilmerHale

Anjan Sahni, partner-in-charge of WilmerHale's New York office, advises individuals and institutions on high-stakes
government investigations and litigation across various agencies and issues. Sahni has been lead counsel in a
dozen federal criminal trials since 2005, including the prosecution of terrorism offenses and the prosecution of an

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

attempted bombing of Times Square. Sahni, committed to mentoring young lawyers and working with a diverse
team, is on his firm's management, diversity and compensation committees. Outside the firm, Sahni provides legal
support to the Sikh Coalition and offers pro bono work to assault victims and people involved in FBI terrorism
investigations.

TERRI SELIGMAN Partner Frankfurt Kurnit

At Frankfurt Kurnit, Terri Seligman is a partner and co-chair of advertising, marketing and public relations. Seligman
regularly practices before the National Advertising Division, representing companies in regulatory matters and
advertising disputes. She helped create the racial justice task force and co-chairs it. The task force has been
instrumental in facilitating discussions and learning opportunities around race, updating the firm's policies, and
formalizing racial justice tenets to guide hiring practices and workplace culture. Seligman, who also co-chairs the
reproductive rights task force, creates opportunities for underrepresented groups in the legal field through drafting
work-life balance and caregiver leave policies. She regularly provides pro bono counsel to city organizations.

UMAR SHEIKH Principal and chair Offit Kurman

Umar Sheikh's work as principal and chair of Offit Kurman's real estate law and business transactions practice
concentrates on all aspects of real estate law, from financing and foreclosures to asset protection and estate
planning. Sheikh, who has experience with Islamic shariah-compliant finance, has represented clients on
sustainable hospitality and energy storage, and he has litigated matters involving real estate and corporate interests
in all levels of courts. He mentors younger attorneys of color, often speaks at local mosques about the importance
of estate planning, and sits on the board of Muslims 4 Peace, a nonprofit that connects people from various
backgrounds through interfaith dialogue. Sheikh heads the recruitment and retention subcommittee of Offit
Kurman's diversity committee.

CYNTHIA SHOSS Partner Eversheds Sutherland

At Eversheds Sutherland, partner Cynthia Shoss assists clients with insurance regulatory matters and corporate
governance. Shoss leads a team of advisers on a transaction to transform Columbian Mutual Life Insurance
Company into a stock life insurance company. In addition, she is involved in negotiating the definitive merger
agreement, policyholder disclosure documents and regulatory approvals. Shoss was the first woman and second
lawyer in private practice to receive the Distinguished Service Award for Lifetime Services from the Association of
Life Insurance Counsel. Recently, she finished serving the maximum term on her firm's global board. Shoss is on
the board of the Greenberg School of Risk Management at St. John's University. She is the chair of the Economic
Mobility Corporation board of directors.

DAWN SMALLS Partner Jenner & Block

Dawn Smalls works with clients from tier-one financial institutions to homeless New Yorkers and leads high-stakes
matters. The Jenner & Block partner is a member of the firm's management committee, which oversees the firm's
daily operations. Smalls worked in the Clinton and Obama administrations as assistant to the White House chief of
staff and as the chief regulatory officer at the Department of Health and Human Services, respectively. She was a
candidate in 2019 for New York City public advocate. Smalls mentors, advises and supports diverse candidates on
the local, state and federal level. She is on the boards of the Roosevelt Institute and the Stone Barns Center for
Food and Agriculture.

RUTI SMITHLINE Partner Morrison Foerster

Ruti Smithline co-chairs Morrison Foerster's investigations and white-collar defense group and the firm's Latin
American desk. The native Colombian and fluent Spanish speaker advises on matters of corruption, fraud and
compliance in Latin America. Smithline, who has been recognized by the Legal 500 and by LatinVex, leads the
firm's Visiting International Attorney program and oversees more than 70 attorneys as head of the New York
litigation department. She has been on the selection committee for the TotalLaw Prep program, which supports
lawyers of Afro-descendant and indigenous Latin American backgrounds. Smithline is a member of the Women's

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
                                      NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

White Collar Defense Association. She mentors junior lawyers and contributes to pro bono initiatives at the Cyrus
R. Vance Center for International Justice.

ALISON STEIN Partner Jenner & Block

As a partner and co-chair of the content, media and entertainment practice at Jenner & Block, Alison Stein
represents media companies, such as Nintendo and ViacomCBS, in high-profile intellectual property counseling,
content moderation and litigation. She works on the firm's associate management and evaluation committees and
co-chairs the Media Law Resource Center's Internet and Technology Law Committee. Stein is on the board of
directors of Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts and the Irving Fine Society. She has published articles about issues
relating to women and the workplace, and she has worked on women's and development issues in Haiti, Ghana,
Tanzania and Uganda. Stein's pro bono practice includes reproductive rights and civil rights work.

DUVOL THOMPSON Partner Holland & Knight

Duvol Thompson has represented clients in litigation and business disputes spanning many industries, from
financial services to multinational energy, media and entertainment. The Holland & Knight partner has spent his
entire career at the firm, where he co-chairs the New York office's diversity committee. Thompson, named a 2019
Fellow of the Leadership Council on Legal Diversity, has worked to establish a welcoming workplace environment
for attorneys of color. He is a board member for the Pipeline to Practice Foundation, an organization that advances
diversity in the legal profession, and for Strategies for Youth, a nonprofit that seeks to improve interactions between
young people and the police and reduce unnecessary and forceful arrests.

LATISHA THOMPSON Partner Morrison Cohen

Morrison Cohen partner Latisha Thompson is chair of the firm's business litigation. Thompson, who focuses on
complex business disputes, real estate litigation and restructuring, has represented a large global auction house in
employee raiding and breach of restrictive covenant action. She is a member of the firm's diversity and inclusion
committee. Thompson mentors female and minority associates, and she has hosted and organized affinity group
events to support diverse attorneys. She devotes many hours to training associations and leads associate training
workshops in the firm's business litigation department. Thompson is a member of the New York City Bar
Association, the New York State Bar Association and the Metropolitan Black Bar Association.

HECTOR TORRES Partner Kasowitz Benson Torres

At Kasowitz Benson Torres, partner Hector Torres is co-chair of the firm's antitrust group. In that role he represents
domestic and international corporations in high-profile antitrust and commercial litigation and arbitration. Torres has
handled some of the largest antitrust matters in the country; he represented Ford Motor Co. in connection with the
Department of Justice's largest criminal antitrust investigation. As co-chair of the firm's diversity and inclusion
committee, Torres has helped promote minority and women partners. Under his leadership, Kasowitz is a mentor
law firm for John Dewey High School students and runs their mock trial program. Torres is on the Committee on
Character and Fitness for the New York state Supreme Court, Appellate Division, First Judicial Department.

SERGIO URIAS Partner Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld

Law firm partner Sergo Urias represents diverse middle-market private-equity funds and their portfolio companies in
complex mergers-and-acquisitions transactions globally. His practice focuses on recapitali-zations, leveraged
buyouts, growth-equity investments and related corporate transactions, working with private-equity and investment
funds in the U.S. and Latin America. Before recently joining Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, Urias was partner
and co-chair of Covington & Burling's private-equity practice group, head of the firm's Latin America initiative and a
member of its corporate practice group. He co-founded Project Paz, a nonprofit that raises funds for young people
in Mexico affected by drug-related violence. Urias has participated in conversations with Mexico's Ministry of
Foreign Affairs on disability protection practices. He is a member of the governing body of the Vance Center for
International Justice.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
                                     NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW

PHOEBE A. WILKINSON Partner Hogan Lovells

At Hogan Lovells, Phoebe A. Wilkinson represents manufacturers and retailers in class actions and other
commercial litigation and arbitration. As global managing partner of advancement at the firm, Wilkinson leads efforts
to promote a pipeline of top talent and works on the global leadership team for the firm's litigation practice.
Recently, she led a team that defeated class certification efforts against LG Electronics and Best Buy and obtained
a defense verdict in a dispute between a product manufacturer and an asset-based lender. In collaboration with the
firm's diversity and inclusion team, Wilkinson oversees the setting and achievement of goals for diverse hiring. She
is a board member of the Brown University Sports Foundation and a past board member of New York Lawyers for
the Public Interest.

MILTON WILLIAMS Partner Walden Macht & Haran

Milton Williams has a white-collar defense practice focusing on trial work, regulation, internal investigations,
employment law and complex commercial litigation. The Walden Macht & Haran partner was an assistant U.S.
attorney in New York's Southern District and an assistant district attorney in Manhattan. Williams, a founding
member of his firm's diversity and inclusion committee, supports increased representation across the legal industry.
He was co-chair of the Moreland Commission, and he holds leadership positions with the Cardinal's Review Board,
the Governor's Screening Panel, Sanctuary for Families and Prisoners' Legal Services of New York. Williams ran
the Sponsors for Educational Opportunity Corporate Law Program for 16 years.

AMY WOLLENSACK Partner Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld

Before Amy Wollensack recently became a partner in the private-equity practice at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &
Feld, she was a partner and co-chair of the private-equity practice at Covington & Burling. She was a member of
that firm's corporate practice group, co-chair of its diversity and inclusion committee, and a leader of its affinity
group for Black attorneys. Wollensack represents private-equity funds in leveraged buyouts, recapitalizations and
mergers and acquisitions, among other complex transactions. She has mentored law students through the
Leadership Council on Legal Diversity. Wollensack is on the board of the nonprofit Housing Plus; she previously
was on the Young Leadership Committee of Lighthouse International. She is a member of Apollo Young Patrons, a
community of next-generation theater leaders.

AYSE YUKSEL Global head of corporate, M&A and securities Norton Rose Fulbright

At Norton Rose Fulbright, Ayse Yuksel develops global strategy and supervises the law practice. Although Yuksel is
based in New York, she leads the firm's office in Istanbul. The firm's global head of corporate, mergers and
acquisitions, and securities is a member of its global executive committee. In that role she regularly leads cross-
border legal teams on client matters. Yuksel has been recognized by The American Lawyer and Chambers. She
participated in the Turkey-based Global Relationship Forum, serving on a task force with former Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright and former CIA director David Petraeus. Yuksel is a member of the American Turkish Society's
Young Society Leaders, a member of the board of trustees for Robert College high school and a leader in recent
pro bono reports for the World Bank.

LISA ZEIDERMAN Managing partner Miller Zeiderman

Lisa Zeiderman is a matrimonial and family lawyer, divorce financial analyst and litigator at Miller Zeiderman. The
firm's managing partner, a vocal supporter of the Judiciary of New York during a budgetary crisis, wrote an op-ed in
the New York Law Journal on the subject. Her legal achievements, which draw from her experience as a former
fashion business owner, have been recognized by many legal authorities. She regularly appears on panel
discussions and mentors law students at the Fordham University School of Law. Zeiderman works closely with
Legal Information for Families Today, a pro bono adviser for underserved families. She is involved with numerous
female empowerment initiatives, Jewish organizations and anti-racist efforts.


Load-Date: July 14, 2022

                                                   Page 17 of 17
                  NOTABLE DIVERSE LEADERS IN LAW




