

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                                     Local woman awarded Pillars of Strength Scholarship




                     Local woman awarded Pillars of Strength Scholarship
                                              The Gallup Independent (New Mexico)
                                                    October 4, 2023 Wednesday



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 The Gallup Independent.

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 534 words

Body


ADELPHI, Md. - A Thoreau resident was awarded a scholarship to the University of Maryland Global Campus that
recognizes volunteer caregivers of veterans. Thoreau resident Lyra Helms has been awarded the Pillars of Strength
Scholarship to attend the University of Maryland Global Campus. The scholarship program includes full tuition and
fees. It recognizes the sacrifices of volunteer caregivers of wounded, ill or injured service members.

A news release from UMGC shared that those who receive the scholarship have devoted years of their lives to
caring for their loved ones, but receive few, if any, federal education benefits. Many of them are the main family
earners. Dedication, courage and sacrifice The release said Helms exemplifies the dedication, courage and
sacrifice of volunteer caregivers. She has worked in health care for nearly a decade and has been an advocate for
the military veterans community - a commitment that dovetails with the support she has provided her fiance, who
served in the Army.

Helms' advocacy work grew out of watching the experiences of friends, relatives and others in her life who have
served in the military and experienced combat.

"Veterans are an underserved population in terms of mental health resources and support assimilating back to
civilian life," Helms said.

Helms said her time as a fellow with the Elizabeth Dole Foundation, an advocacy group for veteran caregivers,
provided her with many resources to help advocate for veterans and their loved ones. "So many people are
unaware of the help available to them," she explained.

Her fiance, Adam Griego, served in the Army 1st Battalion as part of the 23rd Infantry Regiment nicknamed the
"Tomahawks." He deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan, earning a Purple Heart after combat in Panjwai, Afghanistan.

"Adam is of great support to his veteran peers," Helms said. "We both work together to help our friends navigate the
day-to-day after leaving military life." 'Anything is possible' Helms has a master's degree in occupational therapy
from the University of New Mexico. As an occupational therapist, she has been able to provide care to patients
across the lifespan, ranging from infants to elderly. She has transitioned from direct patient care to health care
leadership. She currently works as the director of personal care for Corus Health in Albuquerque, where she strives
to provide quality caregiving support for members of the community. Helms' new aspiration is to work at the

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                               Local woman awarded Pillars of Strength Scholarship

intersection of healthcare and cybersecurity. She is interested in the role cybersecurity will play in healthcare as
technology develops. She is looking forward to using her healthcare experience with service members to help
shape that future. She plans to use her Pillars scholarship to pursue a master's degree in cybersecurity
management and policy.

"I am excited to see how I can connect cybersecurity to health care," she said. "AI [artificial intelligence] is
advancing so rapidly, and it will change our healthcare system as we know it." "As an advocate for caregivers," Lyra
said, "I will [also] speak of the Pillars program with my firsthand experience to create buy-in and understanding that
anything is possible."



Graphic


Lyra Helms. Vida Volkert/Independent A throng of riders arrive to the Yei Bi Chei grounds during the Northern
Navajo Nation Fair in October 2018. Participants will be again riding to this year's ceremony Friday.


Load-Date: October 5, 2023


  
