

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                                 Researchers: 319K covid deaths could have been avoided




                Researchers: 319K covid deaths could have been avoided
                                               Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)
                                                     May 17, 2022 Tuesday



Copyright 2022 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved

Length: 437 words
Byline: New York Daily News

Body


About a third of the 1 million lives lost to covid-19 could have been saved with vaccines, an analysis shows.

Researchers at the Brown School of Public Health, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health and Microsoft AI for Health analyzed data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
The New York Times and came up with not only 319,000 needless deaths, but also a state-by-state breakdown of
where they could have been prevented.

Between January 2021 and April 2022, about every second person who died from covid-19 since vaccines became
available might have lived if they had gotten the shots, the researchers found. Nationwide, about half of the 641,000
people who have died since vaccines became available could have lived if every eligible adult had gotten jabbed.

"At a time when many in the U.S. have given up on vaccinations, these numbers are a stark reminder of the
effectiveness of vaccines in fighting this pandemic," said Stefanie Friedhoff, associate professor of the practice in
Health Services, Policy and Practice at the Brown University School of Public Health, and a co-author of the
analysis, in a statement. "We must continue to invest in getting more Americans vaccinated and boosted to save
more lives."

They created a dashboard showing the number of vaccine-preventable deaths per 1 million residents in each state
and in the U.S. as a whole. Then they created an "alternative scenario" positing what it would look like if the
vaccination pace had been sustained at its highest point last spring and stayed aloft long enough for 85%, 90% or
even 100% of the adult population to get jabbed.

What it looked like was 319,000 people still being alive, even when variants' effectiveness on immunity was
factored out.

The most lives could have been saved in West Virginia, Wyoming, Tennessee, Kentucky and Oklahoma, the team
found.

Where vaccination rates were higher, such as Washington, D.C., Massachusetts, Puerto Rico, Vermont and Hawaii,
the number of deaths that could have been prevented with vaccines was lower.

For instance, if all adults in Tennessee had gotten vaccinated, there would be 11,047 fewer deaths being mourned,
the study found. Likewise in Ohio, where the number stood at 15,875.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
                            Researchers: 319K covid deaths could have been avoided

"This compelling data illustrates the trajectory of 50 states with 50 different fates during the covid-19 pandemic,
emphasizing the important role of vaccines in protecting lives in each state," said Thomas Tsai, a surgeon at
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Assistant Professor in Health Policy and Management at Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health.


Load-Date: May 19, 2022


  
