

                                                                                                Page 1 of 2
        THE CONVERSATION; Michigan Medicine CTO is engineering health care's efficiency transformation




 THE CONVERSATION; Michigan Medicine CTO is engineering health care's
                    efficiency transformation
                                                     Crain's Detroit Business
                                                          October 23, 2023
                                                            Print Version



Copyright 2023 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 22; Vol. 39
Length: 602 words
Byline: Dustin Walsh

Body


What exactly is the role of a chief transformation officer?

We all know what a CFO does. But the places that have the CTO role; it varies from place to place. I am trained in
operations research. I am faculty in the department of industrial operations and engineering, but I have been doing
health care work for 15 years now. The question we're trying to answer is why health care has not had the same
successes as operational engineering. That's why I started the Center for Healthcare and Patient Safety. My
original training was in airlines and freight. Every problem there sounded like engineering homework. There was
always an optimization. But as engineers, we need to understand the health care system - its language and its
problems. That's where I come in. I am working with clinicians, researchers and students to examine all sorts of
problems. I teach students to work in multi-disciplinary teams. So now I take that same approach, but prioritized
around problems that are the greatest issues at the health system.

How do you solve those problems?

I'm not sure I knew what we were creating when we created it. But we knew there was opportunity here. We knew
we'd find some value. We, like many places, have a disconnect between innovative ideas that can help solve
problems in our health system and a lot of those ideas come from the intersection of disciplines. We're really good
at doing that innovation in an academic setting, but there's a huge gap between having that cool new idea and then
getting it to the doctors or the bedside. I figure out how to bridge that gap. It's always unique to the problem. We
have to weigh how a solution fits into the entire system. Are we fixing one thing, but breaking another? It's never
black or white and all or nothing. We do the deep dive. We figure out, in a complex system, whether fixing this
inpatient care procedure will mess up skilled nursing, etc. We try to have the purview those in the system cannot.

Can you provide an example of this work?

                                                                                               Page 2 of 2
       THE CONVERSATION; Michigan Medicine CTO is engineering health care's efficiency transformation

A current project we did was trying to reduce emails the providers get. It's overwhelming for them and leads to more
burnout. Could we just stop sending those (systemwide) messages? Well, we found the 10 people who get the
most messages and we sent students in to ask questions. Some thought it would be great to get rid of them and
others really wanted them. We discovered providers could pull the reports they wanted in a different way. Some
people got rid of the messages and others got what they wanted with extra data. These are baby steps and seem
easy, but they are important details that get lost in the function of the complex system. It's not about getting rid of
the emails, but finding a strategy to eliminate the burden and give people the right info at the right time.

When we think transformation, we think technology. Isn't that the future of health care?

Technology, wearables, AI, highly specialized cancer regimes, diagnostic imaging; these are all critical to
advancing health care. But how do you get them past the goalpost? What is the context in which you're working
with these technologies? We're lowering the age for a colonoscopy, for instance. That's great until you think about
the people who needed them are now waiting longer. Yes, we need technology to create these solutions. So much
of what we do in a hospital is about duration of time. We need to move faster and I don't believe it's going to look
this way in a decade. But we have to keep framing around what it takes to make it successful in a complicated
system.

READ ALL THE CONVERSATION AT CRAINSDETROIT.COM/THECONVERSATION


Load-Date: October 26, 2023


  
