

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                        Researchers find puberty onset associated with racial, economic privilege




  Researchers find puberty onset associated with racial, economic privilege
                                     Daily Californian: University of California - Berkeley
                                                      March 1, 2023 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 522 words

Body


A study conducted by researchers at UC Berkeley School of Public Health, UCSF and Kaiser Permanente Northern
California, or KPNC, has found a strong association between early onset puberty and young women born into
neighborhoods of less racial and economic privilege.

The study, administered by KPNC, was part of the larger KPNC Puberty Study. It aimed to identify life risk variables
correlated with early puberty among young adults, mainly because of an observed increase of children with earlier
pubertal onset in the last few decades.

"Our findings revealed that neighborhood racial and economic privilege are strongly associated with the timing of
girls' puberty," Kubo said in an email. "Compared to girls born into neighborhoods of concentrated privilege, girls
born into neighborhoods of concentrated disadvantage were significantly more likely to experience pubarche and
thelarche at earlier ages."

The main researchers for the study were lead authors Julia Acker, a doctoral student in epidemiology at UC
Berkeley School of Public Health, and Mahasin Mujahid, the epidemiology division chair, as well as co-senior
authors Julianna Deardorff, the Associate Dean at UC Berkeley School of Public Health, and Ai Kubo, the principal
investigator of the study and a epidemiologist at KPNC.

Kubo said the larger cohort puberty study sampled over 100,000 KPNC adolescents, with over 46,000 girls from
over 2,500 neighborhoods in northern California born at a KPNC facility between 2005 to 2011. KPNC pediatricians
evaluated pubertal timing through routine check-ups beginning at the age of six, measuring two main factors: pubic
hair onset and breast development onset.

Within the study, researchers relied on Harvard School of Public Health doctor Nancy Krieger's "Index of
Concentration at the Extremes" as the standard to assess the amount of neighborhood racial and economic
privilege.

The metric uses U.S. Census data to measure an estimated concentration of white, high-income residents
proportioned to black, low-income residents in a single neighborhood, deeming neighborhoods with the majority
being white, wealthy individuals to be those with more racial and economic privilege.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                     Researchers find puberty onset associated with racial, economic privilege

Kubo notes that previous research on early onset puberty in young adults has singled out variables based on
individual factors as correlating with racial and ethnic differences, such as obesity and race alone, while this study
links neighborhood condition disparities shaped by "racially discriminatory practices and policies" to the racial and
ethnic differences instead.

For future research, the team intends to explore more neighborhood condition constants, including population
density and ethnic enclave, along with early life variables such as maternal mental health, exposure to intrauterine
or secondhand smoking and disadvantageous childhood events.

"Overall, our findings suggest that policies designed to improve economic opportunity and conditions in racially
segregated, economically vulnerable neighborhoods have the potential to reduce disparities in early pubertal timing
affecting racially marginalized girls," Kubo said in the email.


Load-Date: March 2, 2023


  
