

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                     MACHINES CAN LEARN HOW TO HEAL YOU




                            MACHINES CAN LEARN HOW TO HEAL YOU
                                              Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                             June 1, 2022 Wednesday
                                                 SOONER EDITION



Copyright 2022 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: OPINION; Pg. A-9
Length: 684 words

Body


It's 2045, and American troops are engaged in a firefight in a remote desert. A soldier is down, unconscious,
struggling to breathe -- and there's not a medic in sight. A fellow infantryman reaches for a special backpack. Inside
is TRACIR, which stands for Trauma Care In A Rucksack.

It's an inflatable vest that uses artificial intelligence algorithms to measure heart rate, blood pressure and blood
oxygen. The wounded soldier is placed on the TRACIR vest, and it quickly finds a collapsed lung. The vest detects
where the collapse is located, and then automatically inserts a needle between his ribs to re-inflate his lung. He can
breathe again. It may be just enough to allow him to survive until he can be evacuated.

TRACIR is a real project at the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University, funded with millions of
dollars in research money from the Department of Defense. It's just one of dozens of examples cited at a recent
conference on the emerging use of artificial intelligence and machine learning in healthcare. Hosted by Pitt's Center
for Military Medicine Research, the event was funded by the Jewish Healthcare Foundation and DSF Charitable
Foundation.

Using machine learning algorithms, AI can discern patterns in huge arrays of data - and nothing produces data like
the nation's healthcare system - and learn new ways to detect, diagnose and treat disease. Besides TRACIR, here
are just a few of the other projects the conference highlighted:

When carbon monoxide gets into the bloodstream, it latches onto the hemoglobin in red blood cells, and prevents
them from carrying oxygen. Dr. Jason Rose, a researcher in Pitt's Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care
Medicine, and his team have developed compounds that serve as CO magnets, so the poisonous gas latches onto
them rather than hemoglobin. They use an AI program that predicts what shape proteins will assume, based on
their amino acids, to craft antidotes that are stable and highly attractive to CO molecules.

One of the biggest risks to injured soldiers is hemorrhaging, where sudden bleeding can cause blood pressure to
crash beyond a patient's ability to recover. Victor Convertino, a Ph.D. researcher at the U.S. Army Institute of
Surgical Research, has done carefully controlled lab studies using a negative pressure chamber. While lying flat,
people's lower bodies are encased in an airtight chamber which draws blood away from their heads and torsos,
mimicking what happens during a blood loss injury.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                                   MACHINES CAN LEARN HOW TO HEAL YOU

An algorithm that learned more than 130 million data points based on real-time measurements allows a new device
to assess how well each person is able to compensate for their plummeting blood pressure. This can help identify
who is most likely to go into circulatory shock.

Several studies have shown that AI algorithms can do a better job than human doctors at detecting signs of disease
in X-rays and MRI scans. Shandong Wu heads up the Center for Artificial Intelligence Innovation in Medical
Imaging, which encompasses more than 100 researchers from Pitt, CMU and UPMC. Among their research
initiatives: breast cancer imaging, liver disease, heart disease, lower back pain and mental health.

The use of AI/ML algorithms is still in its formative stages and may be several years away from widespread use. But
research leaders believe many of these computer techniques are on the verge of a breakthrough.

Michael Pinsky, a pioneering critical care medicine researcher at Pitt, helped develop a course in AI/ML for Pitt
medical students. It focuses on the three major uses of such algorithms in medicine: detecting whether you're sick,
identifying what's making you sick and tracking whether you're getting better. Students who show a strong interest
in the topic can go on to get specialized computer science training after taking the elective.

"Machine learning is not some special thing," he said, "but will be a big part of medicine going forward."

Mark Roth is a retired staff writer and editor at the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and freelance writer, writing primarily on
scientific and medical topics.


Load-Date: June 1, 2022


  
