

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                               40 UNDER FORTY Eric Schwartz




                                      40 UNDER FORTY; Eric Schwartz
                                                     Crain's Detroit Business
                                                          November 1, 2021
                                                            Print Version



Copyright 2021 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 20; Vol. 37
Length: 268 words
Byline: Kirk Pinho

Body


Eric Schwartz

Co-founder Blue Conduit Associate Professor of Marketing Stephen M. Ross School of Business, University of
Michigan

Age: 35

Career trajectory: After receiving his undergraduate degree in mathematics and Ph.D. in marketing from the
University of Pennsylvania in 2008 and 2013, respectively, Schwartz packed his bags and moved west to Ann
Arbor, where he was assistant professor of marketing from 2013 to 2020 and then became a tenured associate
professor last year. After working in Flint with U-M students on lead issues in the water system, Blue Conduit - an
AI startup that helps identify lead pipes - was officially founded in 2019. It has done work in Flint, Detroit, Benton
Harbor and Toledo.

Proudest achievement: Developing Blue Conduit, which has received grant funding from Google.org, the California-
based Internet giant's charitable arm; Troy-based The Kresge Foundation; and the New York City-based
Rockefeller Foundation. Schwartz said Blue Conduit is expanding to "dozens of other cities" beyond Flint. The
company has grown from no revenue and one employee in 2019 to just shy of $1 million in revenue this year and
more than a dozen full-time employees, Schwartz said.

What's next: Getting Blue Conduit "in the hands of as many communities as possible," Schwartz said. A second
goal is developing a second line of business applying AI to other public health issues, such as tracking legionella
bacteria in water, for example.

Words of wisdom: "When you get that burning gut feeling that you should be doing something that you're not doing
yet, you probably should do it," Schwartz said.

                                                             Page 2 of 2
                              40 UNDER FORTY Eric Schwartz


Load-Date: November 4, 2021


 
