

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 2
            Children Who Escaped Boko Haram Captivity Are Tortured In Detention Amnesty International




    Children Who Escaped Boko Haram Captivity Are Tortured In Detention
                          Amnesty International
                                                        The Will (Nigeria)
                                                    May 27, 2020 Wednesday



Copyright 2020 The Will Newspaper All Rights Reserved

Length: 421 words

Body


 SAN FRANCISCO, May 26, (THEWILL) Amnesty International (AI) has revealed that hundreds of children who
escaped from Boko Haram captivity in the north-east are being tortured by the military. It made this known in a 91-
page report, entitled 'We dried our tears', released on Wednesday to commemorate Children's Day addressing the
toll of the Boko Haram war on children, and also examined how the military's detention and torture have
compounded the suffering of the young ones.

 According to AI, these children end up being displaced and are with no access to education. "At worst, they are
arbitrarily detained for years in military barracks, in conditions amounting to torture or other ill-treatment," a
statement by AI read.

  "The UN told Amnesty International it has verified the release of 2,879 children from military detention since 2015,
although it previously cited a higher figure of children detained between 2013 and 2019. "These statistics are likely
to be a vast underestimate, and the UN has said its access to military detention is restricted so it cannot provide the
actual number of children detained in the context of the conflict. "Most such detentions are unlawful children are
never charged or prosecuted for any crime and are denied the rights to access a lawyer, appear before a judge, or
communicate with their families.

The widespread unlawful detentions may amount to a crime against humanity. "Almost everyone fleeing Boko
Haram territory, including children, is 'screened' by the military and Civilian Joint Task Force a process that, for
many, involves torture until the person 'confesses' to affiliation with Boko Haram.

 "Alleged Boko Haram members and supporters are transferred and held, often for months or years, in squalid
conditions in detention centres including Giwa Barracks in Maiduguri and the Kainji military base in Niger state.
"Every former detainee interviewed offered consistent, highly specific descriptions of the conditions: extreme
overcrowding a lack of ventilation amid stifling heat parasites everywhere and urine and faeces on the floor,
because of the lack of toilets.

 "Although there have been some improvements in recent years, many former detainees, including children, also
faced grossly inadequate access to water, food, and health care." AI said many children continue to be held in
such conditions, even after mass releases in late 2019 and early 2020. It estimated that at least 10,000 people,
including many children, have died in detention during the conflict.

                                                                                                Page 2 of 2
          Children Who Escaped Boko Haram Captivity Are Tortured In Detention Amnesty International


Load-Date: June 12, 2020


  
