

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                           Improving Kupuna Health Through 'Ai Pono




                              Improving Kupuna Health Through 'Ai Pono
                                           The Molokai Dispatch (Kaunakakai, Hawaii)
                                                       August 26, 2020



Copyright 2020 Molokai Dispatch, Inc.
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: COMMUNITY
Length: 560 words
Byline: layout@themolokaidispatch.com

Body


By Dr. Landon Opunui, ND and Miki Wong, RD, Na Pu'uwai

There are multiple social and health disparities Native Hawaiian kupuna face such as high rates of life-threatening
diseases, financial hardship, disability, shorter life expectancies and underutilization of services. As a result, it
should be no surprise that data suggests the health care needs of Native Hawaiian kupuna far exceed that of their
non-Hawaiian counterparts. This leads to health equity problems.

 Hawaiian culture emphasizes care for kupuna. However, many adult caregivers are less available to care for their
aging loved ones because of competing work and 'ohana responsibilities.

 Several studies have reported on the health benefits associated with a return to a precontact Hawaiian diet.
Although this may be an ideal dietary approach for many Hawaiians, food access and cost limitations may not
always allow this a practical option, especially for some of our kupuna who rely on complimentary meal assistance.
In addition, the high concentration of complex carbohydrates found in native starches along with high glycemic rich
tropical fruits may still be problematic for kupuna challenged with metabolic diseases such as diabetes.

 One of N Pu'uwai's flagship programs is our KUpuna Program, the only adult day care offered on the island of
Molokai. The program provides kupuna with a safe and structured environment to enjoy daily activities with other
kupuna and staff while 'ohana caregivers are at work. The program supports kupuna to help them remain active
and healthy, so they can remain at home as long as possible. With a previous capacity of 20 kupuna, safety
guidelines have reduced our capacity to 10 during the COVID-19 pandemic.

 On July 1, we launched our kupuna nutrition program, which redesigned meals with the goal of providing high-
quality nutrition using flavorful, locally inspired recipes with locally sourced ingredients. The program was launched
under the direction of cook Neil Gonzalez, registered dietitian/nutritionist Miki Wong, and volunteer chef coach
consultant, Ikaika Molina.

 Menus were designed to support the health and well-being of our kupuna, many of whom have chronic health
conditions. Gonzalez was inspired to change the menu after making improvements to his own diet. In addition, he
developed daily themes to add creativity and fun to meal planning. "Mostly Molokai Mondays," for example,

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                     Improving Kupuna Health Through 'Ai Pono

showcase locally sourced ingredients from the island —and the kupuna enjoy their meals. Many of them already
avoided rice, citing health concerns. Since introducing cauliflower rice, kupuna are finishing their plates, with
compliments to the cook. Recipe highlights include egg white frittatas, almond-flour waffles, venison stir fry and beef
short ribs with cauliflower mash. Providing delicious and familiar meals also provides comfort to our kupuna who
have been isolated with limited access to socialization.

 This helped Na Pu'uwai forge partnerships with local organizations committed to ensuring the health of the
community such as Sustainable Molokai, which provides reduced pricing on produce.

 We hope to inspire other organizations who have the resources and opportunities to feed our kupuna to consider
consulting with nutrition experts to curate 'ai pono meals that can be used to combat many of the chronic health
challenges our kupuna face today.


Load-Date: August 27, 2020


  
