

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                Parkland school shooting survivor develops Joy, an app built on AI that helps people heal




    Parkland school shooting survivor develops Joy, an app built on AI that
                              helps people heal
                                                  St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
                                                    September 28, 2023 Thursday
                                                             FIRST EDITION



Copyright 2023 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: ; Pg. A12
Length: 877 words
Byline: BARBARA ORTUTAY Associated Pres

Body


Kai Koerber was a junior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School when a gunman murdered 14 students and
three staff members there on Valentine's Day in 2018. Seeing his peers - and himself - struggle with returning to
normal, he wanted to do something to help people manage their emotions on their own terms.

While some of his classmates at the Parkland, Florida, school have worked on advocating for gun control, entered
politics or simply took a step back to heal and focus on their studies, Koerber's background in technology - he'd
originally wanted to be a rocket scientist - led him in a different direction: to build a smartphone app.

The result was Joy: AI Wellness Platform, which uses artificial intelligence to suggest bite-sized mindfulness
activities for people based on how they are feeling. The algorithm Koerber's team built is designed to recognize how
a person feels from the sound of their voice - regardless of the words or language they speak.

"In the immediate aftermath of the tragedy, the first thing that came to mind after we've experienced this horrible,
traumatic event - how are we going to personally recover?" he said. "It's great to say OK, we're going to build a
better legal infrastructure to prevent gun sales, increased background checks, all the legislative things. But people
really weren't thinking about … the mental health side of things."

Like many of his peers, Koerber said he suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder for a "very long time" and only
recently has it gotten a little better.

"So when I came to Cal, I was like, let me just start a research team that builds some groundbreaking AI and see if
that's possible," said the 23-year-old, who graduated from the University of California, Berkeley earlier this year.
"The idea was to provide a platform to people who were struggling with, let's say sadness, grief, anger … to be able
to get a mindfulness practice or wellness practice on the go that meets our emotional needs on the go."

He said it was important to offer activities that can be done quickly, sometimes lasting just a few seconds, wherever
the user might be. It wasn't going to be your parents' mindfulness practice.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 3
             Parkland school shooting survivor develops Joy, an app built on AI that helps people heal

"The notion of mindfulness being a solo activity or something that's confined to sitting in your room breathing is
something that we're very much trying to dispel," Koerber said.

Mohammed Zareef-Mustafa, a former classmate of Koerber's who's been using the app for a few months, said the
voice-emotion recognition part is "different than anything I've ever seen before."

"I use the app about three times a week, because the practices are short and easy to get into. It really helps me
quickly de-stress before I have to do things like job interviews," he said.

To use Joy, you simply speak into the app. The AI is supposed to recognize how you are feeling from your voice,
then suggest short activities.

It doesn't always get your mood right, so it's possible to manually pick your disposition. Yet another activity helps
you practice making an effective apology. Another has you write a letter to your future self, with a pen and a paper -
remember those? Feeling sad? A suggestion pops up asking you to track how many times you've laughed over a
seven-day period and tally it up at the end of the week to see what moments gave you a sense of joy, purpose or
satisfaction.

The iPhone app is available for a $8 monthly subscription, with a discount if you subscribe for a year. It's a work in
progress, and as it goes with AI, the more people use it, the more accurate it becomes.

"Kai is a leader of this next generation who are thinking intentionally and with focus about how to use technology to
meet the mental, physical, and climate crises of our times," said Dacher Keltner, a professor at UC Berkeley and
Koerber's faculty adviser on the project. "It comes out of his life experience, and, unlike past technologists, he
seems to feel this has to be what technology does, make the world healthier."

A plethora of wellness apps on the market claim to help people with mental health issues, but it's not always clear
whether they work, said Colin Walsh, a professor of biomedical informatics at Vanderbilt University who has studied
the use of AI in suicide prevention. According to Walsh, it is feasible to take someone's voice and glean some
aspects of their emotional state.

"The driver is there's a huge demand there, or at least the perception of a huge demand there" Walsh said of the
explosion of wellness and mental health apps in the past few years. "Despite the best of intentions with our current
system - and it does a lot of good work - obviously, there's still gaps. So I think people see technology as a tool to
try to bridge that."

Koerber said people tend to forget, after mass shootings, that survivors don't just "bounce back right away" from the
trauma they experienced. It takes years to recover.

"This is something that people carry with them, in some way, shape or form, for the rest of their lives," he said.

His work has also been slower and deliberate than tech entrepreneurs of the past.

"I guess young Mark Zuckerberg was very ‘move fast and break things,'" he said. "And for me, I'm all about building
quality products that, you know, serve social good in the end."



Graphic


 With the fall school semester having already started or soon to get under way in most of the U.S., school safety is
top of mind, with what to do in the case of a school shooting becoming a regular part of planning.Last year, there
were 47 school shootings. That's just shy of the previous year's 52 and significantly higher than the two years
before that. However, those numbers are lower, in part due to students being in virtual learning due to the

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 3
             Parkland school shooting survivor develops Joy, an app built on AI that helps people heal

pandemic. The deadliest school shooting from last school year was at a private Christian school in Nashville where
the gunman shot through glass to be able to get access inside.SEE MORE: Shots again fired at site of Parkland
school massacre in reenactmentSince the Nashville shooting in March, Tennessee lawmakers approved $230
million for enhanced safety and mental health. In Denver, armed officers are returning to public schools in the
fall.And in Florida, dozens of state laws are focused on school safety.Districts in other states are allowing certain
staff members to carry guns on campus or installing collapsible bulletproof rooms, and in some places, resource
officers are back to walking school grounds.Scripps News reporters nationwide have been closely following safety
changes like this in recent years. They explain the changes their local community schools are making to address
safety concerns this year. Kai Koerber, seen July 27 in Berkeley, Calif., was a junior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School when a gunman murdered 14 students and three staff members on Valentine's Day in 2018. Kai
Koerber, seen July 27 in Berkeley, Calif., was a junior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School when a gunman
murdered 14 students and three staff members on Valentine's Day in 2018. In response, he created Joy, an app
that helps people struggling with sadness, grief or anger. The Joy: AI Wellness Platform app uses artificial
intelligence to suggest bite-sized mindfulness activities for people based on how they are feeling. The algorithm is
designed to recognize how a person feels from the sound of their voice.


Load-Date: September 28, 2023


  
