

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 2
                                                  AI helps detect heart disorder




                                         AI helps detect heart disorder
                                           The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)
                                                    August 22, 2023 Tuesday



Copyright 2023 The Columbian Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved

Section: HEALTH; Pg. B3
Length: 599 words
Byline: Ed Stannard Hartford Courant
Highlight: It can find structural problem that's hard to diagnose

For people who have a serious structural problem in their heart but no symptoms, there has not been a practical
way to detect the disorder.

A researcher at the Yale School of Medicine, however, has developed a way to find the seemingly invisible problem
using artificial intelligence.

Body

It can find structural problem that's hard to diagnose
For people who have a serious structural problem in their heart but no symptoms, there has not been a
practical way to detect the disorder.
A researcher at the Yale School of Medicine, however, has developed a way to find the seemingly invisible
problem using artificial intelligence.

Dr. Rohan Khera, clinical director of the medical school's Center for Health Informatics and Analytics,
said a simple electrocardiogram can be analyzed using AI, which can detect what a basic reading of an ECG
cannot.
Khera's paper about his research appeared in the July 25 issue of the journal Circulation. The work is
centered in the Cardiovascular Data Science Lab, where Khera is the principal investigator.

"Many people, up to one in 20, have structural heart disorder, so their heart function is down, but they
don't know that until they develop symptoms and go to the hospital       or (suffer) adverse effects of a
certain sort that trigger health care needs," Khera said.
The disorder is known as left ventricular systolic dysfunction, which reduces the ability of the heart to
pump blood. It develops before symptoms appear and medical attention is required, Khera said. The problem
can lead to more than an eightfold increase in heart failure and double the risk of premature death,
according to Khera's study.
There are "very inexpensive treatments" for the dysfunction, he said.
"However, we just don't have a way to know who had this. The way to diagnose it is actually getting
cardiac imaging, which is an ultrasound of the heart, or an MRI," he said. "But those tests are not
something you can do with everyone in the community, so this is not feasible."

Using AI and deep learning, "which are very exciting domains in medicine, we developed a technology that
actually uses ECG data," Khera said.

                                                                                            Page 2 of 2
                                       AI helps detect heart disorder

ECGs, which register electrical activity in the heart, are routinely done during physical exams. They can
now be taken on a wearable device such as an Apple Watch, Khera said. About 100 million ECGs are done in
the United States each year, he said.
"We have now identified ways to find signatures of structural heart disorders from these very inexpensive
and widely available tests," Khera said. "And that's the key observation and we are able to do that with
accuracy in the 90 to 95 percent range."
The Yale study has been repeated in California, Missouri and Texas, and validated in a Brazilian
longitudinal study. "So (we've) kind of shown that our approach to identifying those with disease really
works across the board," he said.
"Before, when we were doing echocardiograms, when we were only relying on cardiac imaging, there was not
infrastructure in place to do that at scale for the population," Khera said. "But now with these
technologies, you can actually get people without any expense or challenge       a diagnosis that is very
treatable."
ECGs, which measure a number of different electrical signals in the heart, are printed out on paper. "We
can use the photos of those ECGs and we use computer vision algorithms," Khera said.
"These are tools built to infer deep signatures of disease from photos. So we take photos of ECGs and
identify areas within an ECG that may actually be suggestive of a diagnosis of low heart function.   It's
a hidden feature inside that photo of an ECG that none of us as clinicians can pick up on."

While the ECG is used to measure the electrical signals, AI can pick up structural abnormalities in the
heart by examining the photo. The following fields overflowed: REFERENCE = 08-22 B3 HEALTH-AI-HEART-
PROBLEMSHC_B03



Load-Date: September 21, 2023


  
