

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 3
                                           Liberty + Leadership News: December 1




                                Liberty + Leadership News: December 1
                                                The Fund For American Studies
                                                    December 1, 2023 Friday



Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 American Studies, USA All Rights Reserved

Length: 1042 words
Byline: Marissa Starkel

Body


We hope you enjoy these news stories about TFAS activities, alumni and events this week. , and visit us on social
media for additional up-to-the-moment TFAS news!


30th Annual TFAS Journalism Awards Dinner

On November 14, The Fund for American Studies (TFAS) hosted the 30th Annual TFAS Journalism Awards Dinner
at the Metropolitan Club in New York. During the evening, TFAS presented our 2023 Robert Novak Journalism
Fellowship Awards and Joseph Rago Memorial Fellowship for Excellence in Journalism to the next
generation of top writers. The evening also honored Brian C. Anderson, editor of City Journal, was presented with
the Thomas L. Phillips Career Achievement Award and Benjamin Hall, a correspondent for FOX News Channel
(FNC), was presented with the Kenneth Y. Tomlinson Award for Courageous Journalism for their remarkable
careers.


30th Annual TFAS Journalism Awards Dinner News

The Manhattan Institute featured Brian C. Anderson for receiving the 2023 Thomas L. Phillips Career
Achievement Award.

Benjamin Hall was featured in Adweek upon receiving the Kenneth Y. Tomlinson Award for Courageous
Journalism.

Benjamin Hall spoke on the importance of journalism in his award acceptance remarks. FOX News featured his
award.

Benjamin Hall's remarks were highlighted in The Wall Street Journal's Notable & Quotable.

Link to Image

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                                      Liberty + Leadership News: December 1

In Memory of William C. Dennis

It is with great sadness that The Fund for American Studies (TFAS) shares the passing of beloved TFAS professor,
supporter and friend, William (Bill) C. Dennis. He passed away surrounded by his loved ones on November 10,
2023 at the age of 81. TFAS was fortunate to have Bill as a faculty member for the spring and fall semesters in
2004.

TFAS president Roger Ream shares his cherished memories of Bill during his time at TFAS.
"Bill Dennis was one of the more intellectually curious people I have known in my life," Ream said. "He was
passionate about history, politics and philosophy, and always welcomed conversation with students and others who
shared his desire to explore the world and human relations. Bill also loved nature. He was a mountain climber, hiker
and bird watcher. All of us at TFAS are grateful for the opportunities we had to work with him, explore ideas with
him and be inspired by him."


Benjamin Hall on Courage Under Fire: Reporting from the War Zones

Join Roger Ream '76 in this week's Liberty + Leadership Podcast as he speaks with FOX
News correspondent, Benjamin Hall. Roger and Benjamin discuss his recent book, "Saved: A War Reporter's
Mission to Make It Home."
The book details the story of his survival, his dramatic rescue along with his arduous and ongoing recovery from a
horrific missile attack that critically wounded him and killed several of his colleagues while they were reporting from
the war in Ukraine. Benjamin recounts the intensity of that day, his long road to recovery and both the physical and
emotional challenges he will face for the rest of his life. Additionally, they discuss Benjamin's experiences reporting
from areas of conflict including Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan, as well as an especially intense interaction with
Ugandan special forces in Mogadishu.


Post of the Week
Last month, TFAS supporters, alumni, and friends gathered for an inspirational evening at the Metropolitan Club in
New York City during the 30th Annual TFAS Journalism Awards Dinner, where we honored leaders who are paving
the way in journalism.

During the dinner, Benjamin Hall of FOX News was awarded the TFAS's Kenneth Y. Tomlinson Award for
Courageous Journalism, which he announced on Twitter.
Congratulations, Ben!


TFAS Faculty, Alumni, Supporters in the News

TFAS Vice President of Academic Affairs Dr. Anne Bradley reviewed "You Will Own Nothing: Your War with a New
Financial World Order and How to Fight Back" by Carol Roth for the Acton Institute.

Justin Shubow, Novak '15, was interviewed by Rachel Lu, Novak '15, on the Liberty Law Talk podcast, where he
spoke about the architecture of the Republic.

Drew Lingle, PPF 21, started a new role as a professional staff member for the House Committee on Energy and
Commerce.

Connor Merk '22 was named an Inaugural 2025 Tocqueville Scholar at the Pepperdine School of Public Policy.

Joe Lai '01, PPF '07, writes about the business leaders guide to D.C. for 2024 for the DC Journal.

Rym Momtaz '05, '07 was interviewed on the Center for Strategic and International Studies's "The Eurofile"
podcast about Emmanuel Macron and French foreign policy.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 3
                                     Liberty + Leadership News: December 1

Tim Alberta, Novak '18, appeared on CBS Sunday Morning, where he talked about his new book, "The Kingdom,
the Power, and the Glory: American Evangelicals in an Age of Extremism."

Joseph Lawler, Novak '13, wrote an article for the Washington Examiner about the reasons people are unhappy
about the economy.

Daniel Cochrane, PPF '22, started a new role as a senior research associate at The Heritage Foundation.

Abby Guidera, PPF '19, started a new position as a development and special projects manager at the Economic
Innovation Group.

Kat Timpf, Novak '12, was interviewed on The Hill about the cancel culture and the 'healing mechanism' of
comedy during crisis and war.

Naomi Schaefer Riley, Novak '01, wrote a piece for Deseret News about a conversation with civics educator Jack
Miller about the situation on college campuses as a result of the Israel-Hamas war.

Bill Wirtz '17 launched a new podcast, "Fun Police," with his colleagues at the Consumer Choice Center.

Isaac Schorr, Novak '23, opines for the New York Post the Koch network's endorsement of Nikki Haley.

Rohini Kosoglu '05 was interviewed for Politico about her outlook on AI in health care.

Elliot Kaufman, Rago '18, reviewed "Target Tehran" by Yonah Jeremy Bob and Ilan Evyatar for Commentary
Magazine.

Joseph Simonson, Novak '22, wrote a piece for The Washington Free Beacon about anti-Israel protesters
participating in the protest at Yale University.

TFAS Senior Scholar Dr. Donald Devine wrote an op-ed for The American Spectator about a recent debate in
which he argued that Ronald Reagan was a philosophical fusionist conservative.

TFAS Senior Scholar Dr. Donald J. Boudreaux wrote a two-part (Part I, Part II) article on industrial emissions
regulation for the American Institute for Economic Research (AIER).




Load-Date: December 2, 2023


  
