

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 2
   From the Community | Stanford Medicine is taking the step toward better Native health care Login or create an
                                                     account




   From the Community | Stanford Medicine is taking the step toward better
               Native health care Login or create an account
                                            The Stanford Daily: Stanford University
                                                      October 6, 2022 Thursday



University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1023 words

Body


American Indians, Alaskan Natives (AI/AN), and Indigenous communities have long demanded to have visibility
within the healthcare system and equitable access to care.

Preventable problems cause a disproportionate burden of diseases for these communities and disadvantage them
in comparison to other Americans. One preventable problem is the lack of diversity within the healthcare space.
There is little AI/AN/Indigenous representation across all healthcare professions, which contributes to health
disparities in these communities.

According to a 2018 AMA Council on Medical Education report, out of an estimated 5.2 million AI/AN/Indigenous
individuals in the US, only less than half of a percent are in the physician workforce. Studies show that patient
outcomes and satisfaction improve when patients receive care from healthcare professionals from similar
backgrounds. Also, minority physicians are often more likely to work in underserved regions. These healthcare
professionals can provide more culturally concordant care to underserved patient populations, often in their own
languages.

How can we take steps toward health equity for AI/AN/Indigenous communities? Efforts in this direction require all
leading medical institutions to play a critical role in recruiting and nurturing AI/AN/Indigenous medical professionals.
Namely, Stanford University School of Medicine must empower and equip developing healthcare professionals to
achieve their career dreams and expand healthcare access in their communities.

To help address this crucial need for better Native healthcare, organizations are taking measures into their own
hands. For example, the Association of American Indian Physicians (AAIP) hosts the American Indians Accessing
Health Professions Program each year. This conference aims to increase AI/AN/Indigenous students' awareness of
healthcare professions and aid AAIP's mission: "to pursue excellence in Native American health care by promoting
education in the medical disciplines, honoring traditional healing principles, and restoring the balance of mind,
body, and spirit." Stanford Medicine joined forces with AAIP to host the 7th annual AIAHPP in-person conference.

Spearheaded by Mark Gutierrez, the Director of the Office of Diversity in Medical Education, the in-person
conference served a group of AI/AN/Indigenous identifying students interested in pursuing careers in healthcare.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2
   From the Community | Stanford Medicine is taking the step toward better Native health care Login or create an
                                                     account

The conference began on a powerful note: an opening blessing, song, and land acknowledgment from Ohlone tribal
members Desiree Munoz and Carla Marie (Costanoan Rumsen Carmel Tribe). When supporting AI/AN/Indigenous
communities, it is undoubtedly essential to first listen to and experience the lived AI/AN/Indigenous historical
narratives.

The students also heard from leaders in various healthcare professional fields and gained an appreciation for their
different perspectives. During the three-day experience, students heard from faculty such as current and former
AAIP president Dr. Luke Day, MD (Oglala Lakota nation), and Dr. Nicole Stern, MD, MPH, FACS (Mescalero
Apache), respectively. Notably, students heard from a panel of Native American faculty and physicians describing
their personal and career journeys as Native individuals. Conference activities like this panel were a powerful force
to breathe a sense of belonging into these developing healthcare professionals. As attendee Desirae Barragan
(Gabrieleno Band of Mission Indians of Southern California) said, "I have never been surrounded by so many
Native American Physicians, medical students, and pre-med students, in one space, the future of medicine will be
undoubtedly Indigenous."

Associate dean of diversity in medical education at Stanford Medicine, Dr. Reena Thomas, best exemplified the
theme of belonging with an opening exercise for attendees. She encouraged them to close their eyes and "envision
them[selves] as future medical students in Stanford's lecture halls." This is the vision we have for AI/AN/Indigenous
students pursuing a career in healthcare: a right to belong.

The conference received overwhelmingly positive feedback from students. For example, Lauren Reyes (Diné and
Mescalero Apache) said, "the AIAHPP Conference provided us with a strong network of passionate Native health
professionals and the resources we need to pursue health careers. Being surrounded by people who are driven to
serve our communities gave me a sense of belonging and encouragement in pursuing medicine." Having these
students believe they can be the next face of healthcare professionals should empower Stanford and other medical
institutions to expand their efforts in this direction.

Much work lies ahead in reshaping and rekindling Native healthcare. The AIAHPP conference shows that medical
schools everywhere need to better recruit and admit more AI/AN/Indigenous students to their various programs. For
reference, of the 22,647 students who matriculated into medical schools from 2021-2022, only 164 students
identified purely with AI/AN or in combination with other races/ethnicities. This statistic alone should push Stanford
Medicine to be a powerful voice in this Native health crisis. Stanford needs to provide more resources for Native
healthcare professionals and be a model for institutions around the world. More awareness and action from
Stanford can only aid better visibility and accessibility within healthcare for AI/AN/Indigenous communities.

With these steps, we will get closer to achieving health equity for these communities and create meaningful
opportunities for them to belong in the space of health care.

Christopher Lopez is a member of the Costanoan Rumsen Carmel Tribe. He is an MD/PhD student in Stanford's
Medical Scientist Training Program. Outside work, you will find him surfing the beautiful west coast, working out at
ACSR, and enjoying dinner with his friends on University Ave.

The Daily is committed to publishing a diversity of op-eds and letters to the editor. We'd love to hear your thoughts.
Email letters to the editor to eic 'at' stanforddaily.com and op-ed submissions to opinions 'at' stanforddaily.com.

Print Article


Load-Date: October 7, 2022


  
