

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                                   How Europe is leading the world in the push to regulate AI




                 How Europe is leading the world in the push to regulate AI
                                                      West Hawaii Today
                                                    June 15, 2023 Thursday



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 West Hawaii Today

Length: 738 words
Byline: KELVIN CHAN AP Business Writer

Body


LONDON - Lawmakers in Europe signed off Wednesday on the world's first set of comprehensive rules for artificial
intelligence, clearing a key hurdle as authorities across the globe race to rein in AI.

The European Parliament vote is one of the last steps before the rules become law, which could act as a model for
other places working on similar regulations.

A yearslong effort by Brussels to draw up guardrails for AI has taken on more urgency as rapid advances in
chatbots like ChatGPT show the benefits the emerging technology can bring.

Here's a look at the EU's Artificial Intelligence Act:

How do the rules work?

The measure, first proposed in 2021, will govern any product or service that uses an artificial intelligence system.
The act will classify AI systems according to four levels of risk, from minimal to unacceptable.

Riskier applications, such as for hiring or tech targeted to children, will face tougher requirements, including being
more transparent and using accurate data.

It will be up to the EU's 27 member states to enforce the rules. Regulators could force companies to withdraw their
apps from the market.

In extreme cases, violations could draw fines of up to 40 million euros ($43 million) or 7% of a company's annual
global revenue, which in the case of tech companies like Google and Microsoft could amount to billions.

What are the risks?

One of the EU's main goals is to guard against any AI threats to health and safety and protect fundamental rights
and values.

That means some AI uses are an absolute no-no, such as "social scoring" systems that judge people based on
their behavior.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                             How Europe is leading the world in the push to regulate AI

Also forbidden is AI that exploits vulnerable people, including children, or uses subliminal manipulation that can
result in harm, for example, an interactive talking toy that encourages dangerous behavior.

Predictive policing tools, which crunch data to forecast who will commit crimes, is also out.

Lawmakers beefed up the original proposal from the European Commission, the EU's executive branch, by
widening the ban on real-time remote facial recognition and biometric identification in public. The technology scans
passers-by and uses AI to match their faces or other physical traits to a database.

A contentious amendment to allow law enforcement exceptions such as finding missing children or preventing
terrorist threats did not pass.

AI systems used in categories like employment and education, which would affect the course of a person's life, face
tough requirements such as being transparent with users and taking steps to assess and reduce risks of bias from
algorithms.

Most AI systems, such as video games or spam filters, fall into the low- or no-risk category, the commission says.

What about ChatGPT?

The original measure barely mentioned chatbots, mainly by requiring them to be labeled so users know they're
interacting with a machine. Negotiators later added provisions to cover general purpose AI like ChatGPT after it
exploded in popularity, subjecting that technology to some of the same requirements as high-risk systems.

One key addition is a requirement to thoroughly document any copyright material used to teach AI systems how to
generate text, images, video and music that resemble human work.

That would let content creators know if their blog posts, digital books, scientific articles or songs have been used to
train algorithms that power systems like ChatGPT.

Why are the EU rules so important?

The European Union isn't a big player in cutting-edge AI development. That role is taken by the U.S. and China. But
Brussels often plays a trend-setting role with regulations that tend to become de facto global standards and has
become a pioneer in efforts to target the power of large tech companies.

The sheer size of the EU's single market, with 450 million consumers, makes it easier for companies to comply than
develop different products for different regions, experts say.

But it's not just a crackdown. By laying down common rules for AI, Brussels is also trying to develop the market by
instilling confidence among users.

Businesses and industry groups warn that Europe needs to strike the right balance.

Sam Altman, CEO of ChatGPT maker OpenAI, has voiced support for some guardrails on AI and signed on with
other tech executives to a warning about the risks it poses to humankind. But he also has said it's "a mistake to go
put heavy regulation on the field right now."



Graphic


Lawmakers vote on the Artificial Intelligence act Wednesday at the European Parliament in Strasbourg, eastern
France. (AP Photo/Jean-Francois Badias)

                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
                         How Europe is leading the world in the push to regulate AI


Load-Date: December 1, 2023


 
