

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                                    New CEO at Black Girls Code




                                           New CEO at Black Girls Code
                                               Our Time Press (Brooklyn, New York)
                                                         27 October 2023



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Our Time Press

Section: EDUCATION
Length: 284 words

Body


Black Girls Code has announced the appointment of Cristina Jones as CEO. In accepting the appointment, Ms.
Jones responded:

Dear BGC Community,

It's a joy and honor to introduce myself: I'm Cristina Jones, the new CEO of Black Girls Code.

I come to this position as a longtime supporter of this organization, and a lifelong believer in the ingenuity, ambition,
and underrecognized promise of Black girls, girls of color, and gender-nonconforming youth of color around the
world.

The mission of Black Girls Codeto place one million girls of color in tech by 2040means more than career
development. The skills, training, and resources we offer are the tools to make the future more innovative, inclusive,
and equitable.

Because if there's one thing I've seen to be true throughout my career in tech and media, it's that girls and women
of color hold the visionary power to revolutionize our industries, economies, and culture.

As I step into this role, we'll expand the curriculum to address workforce development by including AI, leadership,
and mental health. We're increasing the age limits to support this community well into job placement. We're
establishing sponsorships and inclusive partnerships focused on equityfrom recruitment to hiring to advancement.
Finally, we're assembling our BGC alumnae and the larger community for networking and professional
development.

Thank you for journeying this far, and I'm thrilled to continue alongside you as we accelerate our mission.

Gratefully,

Cristina

Most recently, Cristina served as Chief Engagement Officer and Chief Marketing Officer for Salesforce.org, where
she worked to humanize tech and elevate the mission and impact through authentic storytelling.

                                                            Page 2 of 2
                              New CEO at Black Girls Code


Load-Date: October 27, 2023


  
