

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                   Talking Tech : The biggest tech stories of 2023 (so far)




                   Talking Tech: The biggest tech stories of 2023 (so far)
                                                        USA Today Online
                                                          July 20, 2023



Copyright 2023 Gannett Media Corp All Rights Reserved

Length: 497 words
Byline: Brett Molina, USA TODAY

Body


Happy Thursday, Talking Tech readers! It's Brett Molina ready with your weekly dose of technology news.

It's July, which means we've crossed the halfway point of 2023. Yes, we're six months away from a new year. Hard
to imagine.

With that in mind, let's take a moment to reflect on some of the biggest stories in technology, so far. This could all
likely change by the time we hit Dec. 31, 2023, but here are some of the big topics dominating tech in the first six
months.

The rise of AI

The use of artificial intelligence through tools like ChatGPT is undoubtedly the biggest tech story of 2023. It's
starting to upend how we search online. AI has infiltrated health, education and travel, and it's got a lot of people
worried we'll lose our jobs. So yeah, it's kind of a big deal.

Americans fear AI will make society's ills worse, and want top tech companies to do something about it, said a May
survey from the Anti-Defamation League.

I just have one question: Has anyone working on AI watched "The Terminator"

The (possible) fall of Twitter

A lot has changed since Elon Musk formally took over Twitter last year. They've laid off staff, eased up on content
moderation, and are pushing users to subscribe to Twitter Blue for perks such as blue-check verification. In May,
Twitter hired a new CEO, former NBCUniversal exec Linda Yaccarino, to help turn things around.

But it won't get any easier with the arrival of Threads, the Twitter competitor from Facebook parent company Meta
that drew 100 million users in less than a week.

What will Twitter look like by the end of 2023? Stay tuned.

The end of an era at Netflix

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                               Talking Tech : The biggest tech stories of 2023 (so far)

Breakups are hard, even when it means telling your kids, or parents, or friends they can't use your Netflix account
anymore. In May, Netflix cracked down on password sharing. If you have a Netflix account and want to add
someone outside your household, you have to pay an extra $8 a month. Sorry, kids, but you're going to have to
watch Outer Banks on your dime. (Oh, and Netflix just changed up pricing plans again.)

Apple dives into mixed reality

Tough to revisit the year's biggest tech stories so far without addressing Apple. Their long-rumored mixed reality
headset became official with the introduction of Apple Vision Pro during its annual Worldwide Developers
Conference.

The headset that appears straight out of "Ready Player One" uses both augmented and virtual reality, is controlled
with only your voice, head and hands, and costs a mere $3,499. Safe to say this isn't a tech gadget for the masses.

Thursday tech tip

Got a big trip planned this summer? If it involves hitting the road, make sure to take these seven apps with you.

One more thing

More of us are using payment apps like Venmo or PayPal to receive or give money. That's got the attention of the
Internal Revenue Service. Should you worry? Here's what to know.

Thanks for reading! Until next Thursday.

This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Talking Tech: The biggest tech stories of 2023 (so far)


Load-Date: August 11, 2023


  
