

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                                           Retirement health costs a concern for many




                              Retirement health costs a concern for many
                                               The Daily Reporter (Columbus, Ohio)
                                                    October 26, 2023 Thursday



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 The Daily Reporter

Section: NEWS
Length: 539 words
Byline: KEITH ARNOLD The Daily Reporter, THE DAILY REPORTER

Body


Persistent inflation and rising health-care costs have left the majority of respondents of a recent Harris Poll with
diminishing confidence in their ability to afford health expenses and maintain physical and financial wellbeing in
retirement.

Columbus-based Nationwide commissioned the poll for its annual Health Care Cost in Retirement survey, which is
utilized by the company's financial services arm.

The survey detailed that during the past year, 18 percent of respondents have postponed health-care actions such
as a medical procedure, physical exam or renewing prescriptions as a means to save money, while 10 percent also
reported considering a downgrade in their health insurance plan to counter higher costs resulting from inflation.

A news release noted the generational breakdown of individuals who were considering such a reduction 19 percent
and 14 percent of Gen Z and Gen X respondents, respectively, and 11 percent of millennials.

Three-fifths of the survey's respondents said they have chosen or would choose a health insurance policy with a
lower premium but higher deductible for a cheaper monthly payment.

Company officials said in the release that the economic uncertainty has resulted in consumers having to make
tough decisions with likely long-term implications.

"While Americans are trading more comprehensive health coverage for lower monthly premiums, many do not
have the means to cover an emergency health-care expense," the release provided, noting that 51 percent of
respondents said they could not pay off an unexpected $5,000 health-care expense.

Nationwide Retirement Institute Senior Vice President Kristi Rodriguez said financial services providers are able to
work with consumers to develop a financial plan to meet health-care costs without compromising their overall
financial wellbeing.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                                    Retirement health costs a concern for many

The survey found that two-thirds of adults are terrified of the impact health-care costs may have on their retirement
plans, with 72 percent of respondents reporting that a top fear is health-care costs rising to an out-of-control level
during their retirement.

Sixty-nine percent of Americans with chronic conditions reported that they do not have a written financial plan that
includes how to pay for the health-care costs related to their health condition in retirement, the survey provided.

The survey also considered the impact that artificial intelligence, or AI, may have on health-care cost planning in
retirement.

"Advances in AI and health-care technology in general are moving faster than ever and may help treat many of
today's chronic diseases, as well as other health issues," Rodriguez said. "While this is good news, longevity
requires more planning."

One in four of respondents said they expect AI advancements in health care to add more than a decade to their
lifespan, with Gen Xers expecting an additional eight years and baby boomers another nine years.

The online survey was conducted Aug. 28 through Sept. 11 among 1,260 adults age 18 years and older who reside
in the United States, including 301 Gen Z participants, 310 millennials, 307 Gen Xers and 342 boomers.

The sample data is accurate to within + 3.7 percentage points using a 95 percent confidence level, the release
detailed.


Load-Date: October 26, 2023


  
