

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
         NYSOFA brings ElliQ Proactive care companion to older adults, reducing social isolation, supporting
                                    independence, connection & engagement




   NYSOFA brings ElliQ Proactive care companion to older adults, reducing
    social isolation, supporting independence, connection & engagement
                                     Niagara-Wheatfield Tribune (Niagara Falls, New York)
                                                        May 25, 2022



Copyright 2022 Niagara Frontier Publications
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: CURRENT NEWS
Length: 1044 words

Body


NYSOFA-ElliQ partnership joins lineup of NYSOFA initiatives to help older adults age in place with innovative
supports and program offerings to combat loneliness and social isolation

Submitted by the New York State Office for the Aging

Building on its comprehensive effort to battle social isolation and support aging-in-place, the New York State Office
for the Aging is delivering voice-operated smart technology into the homes of over 800 older adults.

Under the program, NYSOFA will work with local offices for the aging and partners to identify older adults who
would most benefit from the technology – ElliQ by Intuition Robotics – which is the first-ever proactive and
empathetic care companion.

ElliQ is designed to foster independence and provide support for older adults through daily check-ins, assistance
with wellness goals and physical activities, connection to family and friends, and more using voice commands
and/or on-screen instructions. The technology, which recently launched commercially after years of pilots and early
production deployments, has shown unprecedented engagement levels with older adults. Users have an average of
20 daily interactions.

Distinct from other smart technologies, ElliQ is made specifically for older adults to support independence at home.
While other technologies are reactive to commands, ElliQ proactively suggests activities and initiates conversations,
building context through artificial intelligence (AI) to inform follow-up conversations that create a sense of
relationship with the AI. To support health and wellness, ElliQ offers sleep relaxation exercises, physical activity
exercises, in-depth nutrition-related conversations, and medication reminders for each user's unique condition(s).

In 2017, the U.S. surgeon general declared social isolation to be a "global epidemic" – one that has only worsened
in the COVID-19 health emergency. According to the AARP Public Policy Institute, social isolation drives $6.7
billion in additional associated Medicare spending per year. The health consequences of loneliness and isolation
are equivalent to smoking almost a pack of cigarettes daily. At a time when older adults are at increased risk for

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 3
        NYSOFA brings ElliQ Proactive care companion to older adults, reducing social isolation, supporting
                                   independence, connection & engagement

loneliness and social isolation, ElliQ offers another form of companionship, supplementing traditional, in-person
support.

NYSOFA Director Greg Olsen said, "We are so pleased to partner with Intuition Robotics and make ElliQ available
to older adults in New York. This product does so many things to improve health, combat isolation, and improve
overall well-being and independence. Designed with input from older adults, the future of supporting and serving
older adults includes technology. The future is here."

He added, "Despite misconceptions and generalizations, older adults embrace new technology, especially when
they see it is designed by older adults to meet their needs. For those who experience some form of isolation and
wish to age in place, ElliQ is a powerful complement to traditional forms of social interaction and support from
professional or family caregivers."

Intuition Robotics CEO and co-founder Dor Skuler said, "We've long believed that connecting older adults with local
communities via ElliQ will add an important element in providing holistic support to older adults aging in place. This
partnership with NYSOFA helps us further that mission through an innovative initiative that we are incredibly proud
to be part of."

He added, "We're thrilled to be working with New York state as our first state government partner and believe ElliQ
will be able to effectively engage and encourage older adults in New York to be more independent, healthy and
happy."

Association on Aging in New York (AgingNY) Executive Director Becky Preve said, "The Association on Aging in
New York is thrilled to offer additional technology services to combat social isolation and loneliness. We are so
thankful for NYSOFA's continued commitment to older New Yorkers and the opportunity to partner on innovative
solutions that support aging in place."

The newly enacted fiscal year 2023 state budget includes $2.9 million in funding for pioneering NYSOFA initiatives
to combat social isolation and offer new or expanded innovations in aging service provision at multiple levels. In
addition to ElliQ, this includes: NYSOFA's animatronic pet initiative, which provides lifelike companion pets for older
adults and is proven to reduce self-reported loneliness by 70%; statewide access to Trualta's family caregiver
support platform offering expert-led training across critical care competencies; ride-sharing services designed
exclusively for older adults; and online communities that provide facilitator-led classes and services.

The New York State Office for the Aging continuously works to help the state's 4.6 million older adults be as
independent as possible for as long as possible through advocacy, development and delivery of person-centered,
consumer-oriented, and cost-effective policies, programs, and services that support and empower older adults and
their families, in partnership with the network of public and private organizations that serve them. Stay connected:
Visit the NYSOFA Facebook page; follow @NYSAGING on Twitter and NYSAging on Instagram; or visit
aging.ny.gov.

Intuition Robotics, a startup company based in Israel, is on a mission to empower older adults to live happier,
healthier and more independent lives at home. The company's award-winning product, ElliQ, is a proactive care
companion for older adults. ElliQ helps keep users healthy, engaged and informed, while alleviating the effects of
loneliness and social isolation. Intuition Robotics has won several awards for its work with ElliQ, including Fast
Company's Most Innovative Companies and the CES Best of Innovation award. To learn more, visit www.elliq.com
OR follow on Facebook.

The Association on Aging in New York supports and advocates for New York's mostly county-based Area Agencies
on Aging (AAAs), and works collaboratively with a network of organizations that exist to promote independence,
preserve dignity, and provide support for residents of New York as they age. For more information, follow on
Facebook, visit www.agingny.org, or call 518-449-7080.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 3
      NYSOFA brings ElliQ Proactive care companion to older adults, reducing social isolation, supporting
                                 independence, connection & engagement


Load-Date: May 26, 2022


 
