

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                     Experts discuss AI use across fields at conference




                      Experts discuss AI use across fields at conference
                                              The Dartmouth: Dartmouth College
                                                      October 5, 2023 Thursday



University Wire
Copyright 2023 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 752 words
Byline: Connor Perrotta

Body


On Sept. 29, Dartmouth held its annual Artificial Intelligence Conference, hosting experts in art, banking, business,
health and investment who discussed the applications of artificial intelligence and popular arguments against its
use.

Saeed Hassanpour - the Dartmouth Center for Precision Health and AI director - said at the event that artificial
intelligence can aid health-related initiatives. He noted that AI "can sift through ... a large amount of data in a small
amount of time," to predict outcomes of potential treatment options. Hassanpour added that he is currently working
with AI to research cancer treatments.

Lisa Marsch, Dartmouth Center for Technology and Behavioral Health director, discussed at the conference the
benefits of AI in helping patients who are anxious to seek help.

"Not everybody's going to go seek a prescriber," Marsch said.

Marsch said that patients appreciate digital therapeutics, a term that refers to delivering a medical-grade
intervention entirely through software, adding that FDA-approved prescriptions of software are now available in the
U.S. She stressed the need for these low-stigma services and the "widespread availability of these devices."

Jasmine Lombardi - Chief customer officer at Locus Robotics - spoke toward the end of the conference on the
impact of AI on the workforce, specifically in warehouses. Lombardi said that the average worker in a warehouse
has a "tough life," walking miles a day in hot temperatures and doing manual labor. Locus makes robots that act as
moving platforms, carrying heavier items to which carry heavier items to minimize the risk of worker injuries.

"[Locus robots are] going to help you, not take away your job," Lombardi said.

Aditya Bhasin, chief technology and information officer for Bank of America, spoke about working to minimize AI's
bias in the world of finance.

"Our models actually have to have explainability," Bhasin said. "If a model's not explainable, you can't say to
somebody, 'We didn't make you a loan because the computer said no.'"

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                                  Experts discuss AI use across fields at conference

Bhasin talked about the ethical dilemma of "[AI] augmenting human capability."

"No matter how artificially intelligent the creation of something was ... the human accountability cannot be lost," he
added.

Film and Media studies and digital humanities professor Mary Flanagan said that she thinks that creative integrity
will be preserved in the era of AI, and that she often creates her own pieces of art after feeding a prompt to an AI
software and then using the generated image as reference.

"I have my own voice," Flanagan said. "[I] know what I'm looking for."

Flanagan also spoke about the controversial aspects of AI, specifically with the arts. She noted that AI did not have
a dataset trained on women's art, until she undertook the effort herself.

"Which things do we value?" Flanagan asked the audience. "[I] started thinking about how biased our systems are
... Whose work is valued?"

In an interview with The Dartmouth following the event, 401 Ventures partner Graham Brooks said he feels
concerned about AI from an "academic" standpoint, rather than a "Terminator ... who's gonna take over the world?"
perspective.

"The way that these [AI] models work, they don't understand facts," Brooks said. "They process information in a
very different way. That said, they do it in a pattern-matching way... fundamentally, one could argue that humans do
[this just] as well."

When asked about his opinions on AI in academia, Brooks said that AI is "similar to calculators and the internet ...
They are tools that are gonna be available." He said that we should be "figuring out how to teach with [AI] in a very
open way."

"You go back down to elementary school," Brooks added, "that's where it gets a little bit harrier ... There is a level of
... basic understanding that needs to be done."

Brooks spoke about how age differences can influence the extent to which students use AI.

"[Young children] don't have that level of maturity and responsibility to use it in a positive way," Brooks said. "But ...
if you're in college, and you can use [Chat] GPT to write an essay, let's say ... if you were gonna write that essay in
12 hours ... now you can ... actually do the writing in an hour, or two hours. You're gonna spend 10 more hours on
the critical thinking and the outlining."

For all his insistence on the benefits and relative public acceptance of AI, he clarified that AGI (artificial general
intelligence) is "not going to be a cure-all," providing the example of global warming.


Load-Date: October 5, 2023


  
