

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
                  Arunachal Minister Alo Libang launches AI-driven technology intervention at institutes




Arunachal Minister Alo Libang launches AI-driven technology intervention at
                                 institutes
                                                              The Sentinel
                                                         June 23, 2023 Friday



Copyright 2023 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved

Length: 522 words
Byline: Our Correspondent

Body


ITANAGAR: In a revolutionary initiative that will transform the health and agriculture sectors of the state and
facilitate immersive learning in health care education through 5G AI-driven technology intervention, Arunachal
Pradesh Health and Family Welfare Minister Alo Libang launched the project '5G Applications in the Northeast
Region at various institutes in Pasighat in East Siang district on Thursday. The NEC-funded project, with a hub at
the Guwahati-based Assam Electronics Development Corporation Ltd. (AMTRON), was launched at the
Government Nursing College, Bakin Pertin General Hospital (BPGH), and College of Agriculture under the Smart
City mission. The minister was accompanied by NEC Secretary K Moses Chalai, MLAs Ninong Ering and Kaling
Moyong, state industries secretary Hage Tari, East Siang DC Tayi Taggu, joint director of health services (BPGH)
Dr T Tali, PMC Chief Councillor Okiam Moyong Borang, among others.

Terming the initiative as the first of its kind, Libang said that the NEC-funded initiative would immensely help in
facilitating remote patient monitoring and consultation, telemedicine, and screening through mobile AI App-based
solutions and devices, through which patients could access speedy, affordable, specialized and best of breed
healthcare services in an easy and seamless manner, even in rural areas, through 5G AI solutions. "The project will
be replicated in all districts, including community health centres (CHCs) and primary health centres (PHCs), with a
special focus on rural areas," the health minister added. While visiting the nursing college, which is the first to be
equipped with a virtual reality-powered immersive human anatomy learning model under the project, Libang
interacted and took the feedback of the students on their enhanced learning experiences through the AR and VR
applications.

The minister also visited the BPGH, where the project is being implemented, for exposure to the practical
deployment of 5G health AI solutions in the OPD of the hospital and their benefits to patients and healthcare
professionals. At the College of Agriculture, the Minister visited the 5G lab and was apprised by the Dean, Dr. A K
Tripathi, of the 5G use case applications of IoT and Technology in the agriculture sector and its benefits to the
farmers in smart farming ranging from irrigation, livestock monitoring, precision farming, agricultural drones, etc.
The NEC secretary said that the council is committed to adopting future technologies to have a positive impact in
various development sectors for the speedy socio-economic development of the northeastern states.

The project, funded by NEC under the union DoNER ministry, is jointly executed by AMTRON, the Design
Innovation Centre of Punjab University, the School of Planning and Architecture under the union telecom

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
              Arunachal Minister Alo Libang launches AI-driven technology intervention at institutes

department, and the Telecom Skill Sector Council. The focus will be on medical and health care applications as
computing speeds up the internet through artificial intelligence (AI) enabling technologies ensuring reliability,
affordability, and speed being implemented in the eight northeastern states.


Load-Date: June 23, 2023


  
