

                                                                                                             Page 1 of 2
                          FDA-approved algorithms can inform clinicians of heart abnormalities




      FDA-approved algorithms can inform clinicians of heart abnormalities
                                     Daily Californian: University of California - Berkeley
                                                      February 3, 2020 Monday



University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 518 words
Byline: Olivia Buccieri

Body


Eko, a Berkeley-based cardiac screening and monitoring company founded by UC Berkeley alumni, gained
approval from the Food and Drug Administration for algorithms that screen heart murmurs and atrial fibrillation,
which will pair with its artificial intelligence-powered, or AI, stethoscope.

Jason Bellet, Eko co-founder and chief operations officer, said about 40,000 physicians across 4,000 hospitals
currently use Eko's stethoscope technology to amplify heart sounds and better capture digital recordings. The new
algorithms allow Eko's AI technology to provide health advice to clinicians.

About 4 million clinicians in the United States and 30 million clinicians globally use generic stethoscopes for
physical exams, according to Bellet.

"There's so much subjectivity and variability when doctors have to listen for abnormalities," Bellet said. "We wanted
to help doctors detect disease and abnormal heart sounds and lung sounds using a stethoscope that would actually
give advice to the clinician."

Eko co-founders Bellet, Connor Landgraf and Tyler Crouch founded Eko with the idea to create a stethoscope that
could help doctors and nurses better understand and detect heart diseases when listening to a patient's heart
during a physical exam in 2014 during their senior year on campus, according to Bellet.

After six years of development and collaboration with health systems across the country, Eko's new algorithms
have been approved by the FDA, according to Bellet. Now, Eko is in the process of piloting the algorithms at
several clinics and hopes to roll out the final product within the next couple of months.

"We're really the first to provide a platform that allows clinicians, using their stethoscope, to get real-time insight into
what they're listening to using FDA-cleared algorithms," Bellet said. "We really see our competition as ushering in
this new era and showing clinicians the value of having supported these amplifications."

The current AI found in Eko's digital stethoscope connects to a mobile app, which clinicians can use to visualize
heart, lung or bowel sounds and electrocardiogram rhythms, according to Eko's website.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 2
                        FDA-approved algorithms can inform clinicians of heart abnormalities

Bellet said Eko's plans for the future include developing the technology to expand upon the types of diseases the
stethoscope AI can detect.

He added that Eko is working with the Mayo Clinic on a newer algorithm for screening heart failure that recently
gained a "breakthrough indication" from the FDA, meaning its approval is in the process of being fast-tracked but
has yet to be cleared.

"With a tool that has the accuracy of the cardiologist in being able to pick up disease, and really elevates your
physician's ability to hear, it ... puts the patient's mind at ease," Bellet said. "It's all about patient enablement and
access to great care and it's about fighting disease earlier so that patients can optimize their options to treat it."

Olivia Buccieri is the lead business and economy reporter. Contact her at[email protected]and follow her on Twitter
at@obuccieri_dc?.

Artificial Intelligence,Connor Landgraf,Eko,FDA,Jason Bellet,Mayo Clinic,Tyler Crouch


Load-Date: April 16, 2020


  
