

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 2
                                            NaturaLawn welcomes new franchise owners




                            NaturaLawn welcomes new franchise owners
                                                       Chicago Daily Herald
                                                  January 19, 2022 Wednesday
                                               WEB EditioneBlast EditionML2 Edition



Copyright 2022 Paddock Publications, Inc.

Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 5
Length: 588 words

Body


NaturaLawn greets franchise owners EAST DUNDEE — NaturaLawn of America, the third largest lawn care
company in the United States, welcomed Trevor and Trent Foss to the family as new owners of the Chicago-area
franchise. The brothers now lead the Chicago location, based in East Dundee, after the loss of their uncle and
former owner Jeff Trewyn to cancer. Both look forward to continuing the work of Trewyn and providing the Chicago
region with NaturaLawn of America's signature blend of service and innovation.

The Chicago branch of NaturaLawn serves regions north and west of Chicago, including McHenry, Woodstock,
Crystal Lake, Naperville, Arlington Heights and surrounding communities. Services include organic-based lawn
fertilization, soil amendments, aeration and seeding, grub control and more. Trevor Foss had previously assisted
the Chicago location with operations, after a long career of professional baseball, playing five years as a pitcher in
affiliated baseball, including two years overseas and two years independently. Surgalign system gets FDA
clearance DEERFIELD — Surgalign Holdings Inc. said Tuesday it has received initial U.S. Food &amp; Drug
Administration clearance for its HOLO Portal surgical guidance system for use within lumbar spine procedures.
"Receiving the initial clearance for the HOLO Portal system is a significant milestone and represents a critical step
toward building the foundation of the digital surgery of the future," said Terry Rich, Surgalign's president and chief
executive officer. "With clearance in hand for our guidance application, our near-term focus is getting the platform
into the hands of surgeons as we work toward a market release." The HOLO Portal system is the world's first
artificial intelligence-driven, augmented reality guidance system for spine surgery and the first clinical application of
Surgalign's HOLOTM AI digital health platform, the company said in a press release. HOLO Portal is the result of
six years of development and testing at Holo Surgical Inc., "While the current capabilities of the HOLO Portal
system have the potential to offer a quantum leap in the way surgical procedures are performed, we have a much
larger vision for our HOLO AI digital health platform across a variety of health care specialties and throughout the
care continuum," Rich said. Parts Town expands with acquisition ADDISON — PT Holdings LLC, the parent
company of food service equipment parts distributor Parts Town, Tuesday said it acquired the REPA Group, a
European leader in parts distribution. Financial terms of the transaction were not disclosed. This global combination
will further enhance the availability, delivery and overall experience of finding and buying spare parts for service
companies, restaurants and institutional customers around the world, PT Holdings said. Steve Snower, CEO of PT
Holdings, will lead the combined organization. Alexander Wiegand, CEO of REPA Group, will continue to lead the
REPA Group's European operation. "We are very excited to welcome the REPA Group to the PT Holdings family.
The REPA team is exceptional, and they have built an incredible business," Snower said. "This combination

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 2
                                   NaturaLawn welcomes new franchise owners

strengthens our global capabilities, will improve the customer experience, and will help improve the availability of
genuine (original equipment manufacturer) parts for our manufacturer partners." The new organization will have
significant operations in the U.S., Canada, Germany, France, Italy, the U.K., Spain and other areas of the world.



Graphic


Trevor Foss Trevor Foss Courtesy of Julie Bonebrake Trevor Foss, owner, NaturaLawn of America Chicago
franchise


Load-Date: January 19, 2022


  
