

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
                                     President signs executive order for guardrails on AI




                      President signs executive order for guardrails on AI
                                           The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)
                                                    October 31, 2023 Tuesday



Copyright 2023 The Columbian Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved

Section: NATION; Pg. A5
Length: 430 words
Byline: JOSH BOAK and MATT O'BRIEN Associated Press
Highlight: Associated Press files

President Joe Biden speaks about artificial intelligence in the Roosevelt Room of the White House on July 2 in
Washington. Biden on Monday signed a sweeping executive order to guide the development of artificial intelligence.

Body

Biden seeks to balance tech needs with protections
WASHINGTON - President Joe Biden on Monday signed an ambitious executive order on artificial intelligence
that seeks to balance the needs of cutting-edge technology companies with national security and consumer
rights, creating an early set of guardrails that could be fortified by legislation and global agreements.

Before signing the order, Biden said AI is driving change at "warp speed" and carries tremendous potential
as well as perils.

"AI is all around us," Biden said. "To realize the promise of AI and avoid the risk, we need to govern
this technology."

The order is an initial step that is meant to ensure that AI is trustworthy and helpful, rather than
deceptive and destructive. The order - which will likely need to be augmented by congressional action -
seeks to steer how AI is developed so that companies can profit without putting public safety in jeopardy.

Using the Defense Production Act, the order requires leading AI developers to share safety test results
and other information with the government. The National Institute of Standards and Technology is to create
standards to ensure AI tools are safe and secure before public release.

The Commerce Department is to issue guidance to label and watermark AI-generated content to help
differentiate between authentic interactions and those generated by software. The order touches on matters
of privacy, civil rights, consumer protections, scientific research and worker rights.
White House chief of staff Jeff Zients recalled Biden giving his staff a directive when formulating the
order to move with urgency.
"We can't move at a normal government pace," Zients said the Democratic president told him. "We have to
move as fast, if not faster, than the technology itself."

In Biden's view, the government was late to address the risks of social media and now U.S. youth are
grappling with related mental health issues. AI has the positive ability to accelerate cancer research,
model the impacts of climate change, boost economic output and improve government services, among other

                                                                                             Page 2 of 2
                              President signs executive order for guardrails on AI

benefits. But it could also warp basic notions of truth with false images, deepen racial and social
inequalities and provide a tool to scammers and criminals.

With the European Union nearing final passage of a sweeping law to rein in AI harms and Congress still in
the early stages of debating safeguards, the Biden administration is "stepping up to use the levers it can
control," said digital rights advocate Alexandra Reeve Givens, president of the Center for Democracy &
Technology.



Load-Date: February 5, 2024


  
