

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                                      Artificial Intelligence, Public Trust, and Public Health




                      Artificial Intelligence, Public Trust, and Public Health
                                                        Economic Thinking
                                                     July 13, 2021 Tuesday



Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 Economic Thinking, USA All Rights Reserved

Length: 1247 words
Byline: Gregory Rehmke

Body

The CDC article Artificial Intelligence, Public Trust, and Public Health (CDC Genomics and Precision Health,
September 17, 2020) explains:

 As part of the Data Modernization Initiative, CDC is supporting strategic innovations in data science using artificial
intelligence and machine learning (Ai/ML). Ai/ML is the practice of using mathematics with computers to learn from
a wide range of data and make predictions about the health of populations. By using Ai/ML, CDC can maximize
insights from data to improve disease detection, mitigation, and elimination. Ai/ML applications could support public
health surveillance, research and, ultimately, decision making, ushering a new era of precision public health.

Health care analysts have long wished for "Big Data" to show the way for lowering health care costs. But Big Data
isn't necessarily smart data. Someone or some algorithm has to sort through, categorize, and analyze vast health
care information looking for patterns and relationships.

In Beware the AI delusion (Fast Company, 2018), Gary Smith (author of The AI Delusion), concludes:

In the age of AI and big data, the real danger is not that computers are smarter than us, but that we think computers
are smarter than us and therefore trust computers to make important decisions for us. We should not be intimidated
into thinking that computers are infallible. Let's trust ourselves to judge whether statistical patterns make sense and
are therefore potentially useful, or are merely coincidental and therefore fleeting and useless.

Technology and health care companies are investing in smarter management of health care information. Microsoft
Makes a $16 Billion Entry Into Health Care AI (Wired, April 13, 2021) outlines the potential for Nuance, a medical
transcription service purchased by Microsoft, to expand:

Health care is widely seen as a key industry for applied AI. Numerous research studies show the potential for AI
algorithms to spot disease in images or mine medical records for insights into treatment paths. And while
challenges remain, like getting doctors to trust the technology or preventing bias that creeps in when the data used
to train medical algorithms is insufficiently diverse, an increasing amount of AI is likely to be deployed in health
care in coming years.

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                 Artificial Intelligence, Public Trust, and Public Health

In this YouTube video from PYTORCH DEVCON 19, Andrew Trask outlines Privacy Preserving AI - Andrew Trask,
OpenMined

Learn the basics of secure and private AI techniques, including federated learning and secure multi-party
computation. In this talk, Andrew Trask of OpenMined highlights the importance of privacy preserving machine
learning, and how to use privacy-focused tools like PySyft.

How Big is A.I.'s Future in Health Care?How many medical device and services startups are using A.I.? Likely all
of them, given the loose definition of A.I. and the appeal to investors that A.I. will bring miracles. Japan's AI Medical
Service listed among the World Economic Forum's Tech Pioneers:

AI Medical Service is a Tokyo-based start-up dedicated solely to the development and distribution of endoscopic
artificial intelligence (AI). It is striving to achieve its mission to eliminate gastrointestinal cancers. According to
research, up to 25.8% of cancers and lesions are overlooked during endoscopic practices. Endoscopic AI will assist
physicians in reducing the number of lesions being overlooked during such procedures, which will allow for early
treatment of gastrointestinal diseases, resulting in lower treatment costs and mortality rates.
Also listed among WEF Tech Pioneers is January, a firm with technology to analyze "blood sugar and diet for
diabetes control and prevention":

January AI is focused on improving outcomes for the 122 million people on the diabetes spectrum through a multi-
omic approach to better health. By harnessing science, medicine and machine learning, January's advanced
artificial intelligence (AI) technology discovers how diet and activity affect people differently and provides
personalized recommendations to move them to a healthier state.

There are many other firms in this "metabolic health" space and most rely on natural intelligence instead of artificial
intelligence. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2020 says:
    •   34.2 million Americans-just over 1 in 10-have diabetes.
    •   88 million American adults-approximately 1 in 3-have prediabetes.

New medications claim to reduce obesity and diabetes, or better treat diabetes. But a growing range of medical
researchers, doctors, nutritionist and ex-diabetes make the case that "nutritional intervention," that is, dietary
changes can quickly reverse prediabetes and put type 2 diabetes into remission. Obesity and diabetes they argue
are a consequence of poor metabolic health. Some people, many people in fact, can't each sugar, fructose, starchy
foods, bread, pasta, etc. without stressing their metabolic system leading to insulin resistance and a host of chronic
conditions.
And advance A.I. system could maybe tell people this, and maybe could help influence those convinced
sophisticated software and powerful computers can perceive better how their body works. Or people overweight,
prediabetic, or diabetic could just get a CGM, a Continuous Glucose Monitor and check the app to see how their
metabolism responds to different foods, times, stress, and exercise.
Nutri | Sense offers tools for monitoring your metabolism:

When you join NutriSense, you'll receive a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) that tracks your glucose 24/7. Our
program offers expert guidance to help you interpret that data to reach your full health potential. ...
Your CGM shows your blood glucose levels. The NutriSense app lets you track your daily activity to see how food,
sleep, exercise, and stress impact your glucose.
You can log or import this data, into the NutriSense App, to see the effect on your blood glucose levels as soon as it
happens.
In the LowCarbMD Podcast, Episode 184: Kara Collier, at 37 minutes in, Kara Collier discusses NutriSense
development of A.I. tooks to automate some of the CGM reporting for users.
An earlier Economic Thinking post, Nutrition Notes: Gadgets for Looking Inside (February 4, 2021) reviews various
technologies for measuring body fat, visceral fat, sleep quality, etc.:

The Amazon Halo, is worn on the wrist but doesn't tell time. It measures sleep quality and body fat (via pictures
and AI) For me, the Halo body fat measures matched the Eufy and FitIndex scales. However Eufy has my visceral

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                Artificial Intelligence, Public Trust, and Public Health

fat stuck at 16 (not good) and hasn't changed since last April (maybe a later model works better?). The Fitindex
scale say my visceral fat 7.

Among challenges to status quo medical care, and to deployment of artificial intelligence technologies is the
ongoing politicization of health care and "regulatory capture" of federal nutritional programs and guidelines. This is
discussed (and documented) by the Nutrition Coalition. Basically, a combination of inertia and food industry
pressure blocks recent research on reversing type 2 diabetes and other chronic conditions through nutritional
changes.

More research and discussion at DietDoctor.com, Low Carb Down Under website and YouTube presentations, Low
Carb USA podcasts and posts, and the Society of Metabolic Health Practitioners (SMHP). And boatloads of Dr.
Berg videos outline Keto/low-carb/intermittent fasting success stories.

Again, many Economic Thinking nutrition and public health posts here.



Load-Date: July 14, 2021


  
