

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 2
                                    DEC seeking public comment on Unit Management Plan




                   DEC seeking public comment on Unit Management Plan
                                             Advance-News (Ogdensburg, New York)
                                                      February 27, 2022
                                                         Both Edition



Copyright 2022 Johnson Newspaper Corporation
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: ADV_NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 479 words
Dateline: WATERTOWN

Body


New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) Commissioner Basil Seggos has announced
that DEC is seeking public comment on an amendment to the Campground and Day-Use Area Generic Unit
Management Plan (UMP) that would support DEC's ongoing efforts to prevent the spread of harmful aquatic
invasive species (AIS). The proposed amendment would help advance the construction and permanent placement
of storage facilities for decontamination equipment used to remove AIS from watercraft at DEC sites.

AIS are non-native aquatic plants and animals that can cause environmental and economic harm and threaten
human health. AIS have been found in many of New York State's lakes, ponds, and rivers, and these harmful
species can be transported from waterbody to waterbody on watercraft and equipment.

Research shows that recreational watercraft are the greatest vector for transport and introduction of AIS throughout
the U.S. DEC manages 52 campgrounds in the Adirondack and Catskill forest preserves with more than one million
overnight visitors each season. The campgrounds and five special day-use areas at Lake George Beach, Prospect
Mountain Highway, Hinckley Reservoir Picnic Area, Fourth Lake Picnic Area, and Lake George Battlefield Picnic
Area also receive nearly 400,000 day-use visitors annually. Many of these visitors bring recreational watercraft to
the campgrounds, arriving at DEC facilities from across the state, U.S., and Canada.

Watercraft inspection stewards provide education and outreach to many boaters at DEC campgrounds. The
stewards offer voluntary inspections and boat washes using special decontamination units that have high pressure
and hot water to dislodge and remove AIS from the watercraft and trailers. Currently, decontamination units are
housed in sheds that are placed seasonally. Moving the temporary sheds at the end of each season is challenging
and can damage the equipment. The proposed amendment would advance DEC efforts to construct storage
facilities at campgrounds and day-use areas in the Adirondack and Catskill parks to store decontamination
equipment.

The draft amendment is posted on the DEC website. Copies of the draft amendment are available by calling (518)
457-2500. Public comments on the draft amendment are being accepted through April 2, and can be submitted by

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 2
                             DEC seeking public comment on Unit Management Plan

mail or email to: Josh Houghton, NYS DEC Bureau of Recreation, 625 Broadway, Albany, NY 12233-5253, Email:
campinfo@dec.ny.gov

DEC reminds water recreationists to do their part in protecting New York's waters from AIS by remembering to
clean, drain, and dry watercraft and equipment. Taking proactive steps such as cleaning off fishing tackle, removing
aquatic vegetation from rudders, disinfecting boat hulls and water compartments, and properly disposing of bait,
significantly reduces that risk. For more information, go to DEC's website.


Load-Date: February 27, 2022


  
