

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                       UChicago expands relationship with Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel




 UChicago expands relationship with Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel
                                       The Pulse: Finch University of Health Sciences
                                                December 7, 2022 Wednesday



University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: LATESTSTORIES; Pg. 1
Length: 645 words
Byline: Emily Ayshford and Marie Bejarano

Body


The University of Chicago and the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel will support collaborative research in
quantum information sciences and artificial intelligence, in a partnership that also includes the Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago.

This expanded partnership builds on the existing Marshall and Arlene Bennett Family Research Program, which
funds research between UChicago and the Weizmann Institute of Science in life sciences, physical sciences, and
engineering. Led by UChicago's Office of Science, Innovation, National Laboratories, and Global Initiatives, the
partnership will prioritize new research that leverages AI for new discoveries in biology and materials science, and it
will promote fundamental discoveries in quantum information sciences and engineering. The collaboration among
institutions has the potential to build solutions that can scale globally to benefit humanity.

In a first step, the expanded partnership has awarded more than $1 million in research funding for three
collaborative projects that advance the scientific domain and have significant impact in science and technology and
travel grants for three additional research teams. Research topics for the funded projects include applications of
artificial intelligence in medicine and materials science, as well as quantum information sciences with applications to
communication networks.

"The University of Chicago's commitment to scholarly work that shapes and defines fields of study is strengthened
through international and cross-institutional collaborations like this," said University of Chicago President Paul
Alivisatos. "The Weizmann Institute of Science is a world-class partner, and together we can forge a much deeper
understanding of the foundations of data science and artificial intelligence and develop new beneficial uses."

"The Weizmann Institute has a long history of international collaborations that have inspired scientists to make a
collective impact on global challenges," said Alon Chen, president of the Weizmann Institute. "We look forward to
continue to partner with the University of Chicago to combine our strengths in this new era of artificial intelligence
and quantum science."

"I am thrilled to see that my family's research program has inspired a global initiative between these three renowned
institutions," said Bija Bennett, director and president of the Bennett Family Foundation.

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 2
                     UChicago expands relationship with Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel

The Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, one of the world's leading basic research institutions, is composed of
250 experimental and theoretical research groups across five faculties-biology, biochemistry, chemistry,
mathematics and computer science, and physics.

The Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago is an academic computer science institute dedicated to basic
research and graduate education. The institute is located on the UChicago campus and has a close affiliation with
the University of Chicago's Department of Computer Science.

The AI projects in health and biology will seek to use artificial intelligence to improve our ability to understand the
rules of life-from the molecular scale to multicellular organisms and ecosystems. In materials science, researchers
will explore how to leverage AI to predict the properties and guide the design and synthesis of new materials.

"Artificial intelligence and quantum information science have the potential to propel innovations that will cut across
multiple domains," said Juan de Pablo, executive vice president for science, innovation, national laboratories, and
global initiatives at the University of Chicago. "It is with trans-institutional efforts like these that true advancements
emerge. We are honored to work with these institutions, and these grants are the first step in what we hope will be
a long and fruitful partnership that results in exciting, field-defining breakthroughs."


Load-Date: December 8, 2022


  
