

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                                        Biden signs executive order to guide AI safety




                          Biden signs executive order to guide AI safety
                                                      The Hartford Courant
                                                   October 31, 2023 Tuesday
                                                             1 Edition



Copyright 2023 The Hartford Courant Company All Rights Reserved

Section: SPORTS; D; Pg. 6
Length: 1163 words
Byline: Josh Boak and Matt O'Brien Associated Press

Body


WASHINGTON - President Joe Biden on Monday signed a sweeping executive order to guide the development of
artificial intelligence - requiring industry to develop safety and security standards, introducing new consumer
protections and giving federal agencies an extensive to-do list to oversee the rapidly progressing technology.

The order reflects the government's effort to shape how AI evolves in a way that can maximize its possibilities and
contain its perils.

AI has been a source of deep personal interest for Biden, with its potential to affect the economy and national
security.

White House chief of staff Jeff Zients recalled Biden giving his staff a directive to move with urgency on the issue,
having considered the technology a top priority.

In Biden's view, the government was late to address the risks of social media and now U.S. youth are grappling with
related mental health issues. AI has the positive ability to accelerate cancer research, model the impacts of climate
change, boost economic output and improve government services, among other benefits.

But it also could warp basic notions of truth with false images, deepen racial and social inequalities, and provide a
tool to scammers and criminals.

The order builds on voluntary commitments already made by technology companies. It's part of a broader strategy
that administration officials say also includes congressional legislation and international diplomacy, a sign of the
disruptions already caused by the introduction of new AI tools such as ChatGPT that can generate new text,
images and sounds.

Using the Defense Production Act, the order will require leading AI developers to share safety test results and other
information with the government. The National Institute of Standards and Technology is to create standards to
ensure AI tools are safe and secure before public release.

                                                                                                            Page 2 of 3
                                     Biden signs executive order to guide AI safety

The Commerce Department is to issue guidance to label and watermark AI-generated content to help differentiate
between authentic interactions and those generated by software. The order touches on matters of privacy, civil
rights, consumer protections, scientific research and worker rights.

An administration official who previewed the order on a Sunday call with reporters said the to-do lists within the
order will be implemented and fulfilled over the range of 90 days to 365 days, with the safety and security items
facing the earliest deadlines.

The official briefed reporters on condition of anonymity, as required by the White House.

Last Thursday, Biden gathered his aides in the Oval Office to review and finalize the executive order, a 30-minute
meeting that stretched to 70 minutes, despite other pressing matters including the mass shooting in Maine, the
Israel-Hamas war and the selection of a new House speaker.

Biden was profoundly curious about the technology in the months of meetings that led up to drafting the order. His
science advisory council focused on AI at two meetings and his Cabinet discussed it at two meetings. The president
also pressed tech executives and civil society advocates about the technology's capabilities at multiple gatherings.

"He was as impressed and alarmed as anyone," deputy White House chief of staff Bruce Reed said in an interview.
"He saw fake AI images of himself, of his dog. He saw how it can make bad poetry. And he's seen and heard the
incredible and terrifying technology of voice cloning, which can take three seconds of your voice and turn it into an
entire fake conversation."

The possibility of false images and sounds led the president to prioritize the labeling and watermarking of anything
produced by AI. Biden also wanted to thwart the risk of older Americans getting a phone call from someone who
sounded like a loved one, only to be scammed by an AI tool.

Meetings could go beyond schedule, with Biden telling civil society advocates in a ballroom of San Francisco's
Fairmont Hotel in June: "This is important. Take as long as you need."

The president also talked with scientists and saw the upside that AI created if harnessed for good. He listened to a
Nobel Prize-winning physicist talk about how AI could explain the origins of the universe. Another scientist showed
how AI could model extreme weather like 100-year floods, as the past data used to assess these events has lost its
accuracy because of climate change.

The issue of AI was seemingly inescapable for Biden. At Camp David one weekend, he relaxed by watching the
Tom Cruise film "Mission: Impossible - Dead Reckoning Part One." The film's villain is a sentient and rogue AI
known as "the Entity" that sinks a submarine and kills its crew in the movie's opening minutes.

"If he hadn't already been concerned about what could go wrong with AI before that movie, he saw plenty more to
worry about," said Reed, who watched the film with the president.

Governments around the world have raced to establish guardrails, some of them tougher than Biden's directives.
After more than two years of deliberation, the EU is putting the final touches on a comprehensive set of regulations
that targets the riskiest applications with the tightest restrictions. China, a key AI rival to the U.S., has also set some
rules.

U.K. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak hopes to carve out a prominent role for Britain as an AI safety hub at a summit
starting Wednesday that Vice President Kamala Harris plans to attend. And on Monday, officials from the Group of
Seven major industrial nations agreed to a set of AI safety principles and a voluntary code of conduct for AI
developers.

The U.S., particularly its West Coast, is home to many of the leading developers of cutting-edge AI technology,
including tech giants Google, Meta and Microsoft and AI-focused startups such as OpenAI, maker of ChatGPT. The
White House took advantage of that industry weight earlier this year when it secured commitments from those
companies to implement safety mechanisms as they build new AI models.

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 3
                                    Biden signs executive order to guide AI safety

But the White House also faced significant pressure from Democratic allies, including labor and civil rights groups,
to make sure its policies reflected their concerns about AI's real-world harms.

The American Civil Liberties Union is among the groups that met with the White House to try to ensure "we're
holding the tech industry and tech billionaires accountable" so that algorithmic tools "work for all of us and not just a
few," said ReNika Moore, director of the ACLU's racial justice program.

Suresh Venkatasubramanian, a former Biden administration official who helped craft principles for approaching AI,
said one of the biggest challenges within the federal government has been what to do about law enforcement's use
of AI tools, including at U.S. borders.

"These are all places where we know that the use of automation is very problematic, with facial recognition, drone
technology," Venkatasubramanian said. Facial recognition technology has been shown to perform unevenly across
racial groups, and has been tied to mistaken arrests.


Load-Date: October 31, 2023


  
