

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                               School Safety Index Predicts K-12 COVID Policy Effectiveness




             School Safety Index Predicts K-12 COVID Policy Effectiveness
                                                Government TechNology
                                                October 11, 2021 Monday



Copyright 2021 Government Technology

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 620 words
Byline: Brandon Paykamian, Government Technology

Body


Oct. 11—As schools seek to mitigate the risks of in-person learning in the face of the COVID-19 delta variant,
officials are turning to digital resources for advice. To help, the health technology firm HSR.health built an online
data tool to predict the effectiveness of school health policies, down to each building and classroom.

According to a news release, the Maryland-based company recently developed its School Safety Index to inform
administrators about best practices depending on specific school conditions. It also created a COVID-19
Transmission Risk Index to predict future outbreaks, and a Mortality Risk Index to identify geographical areas with
the highest risk of deaths.

HSR.health CEO Ajay Gupta said the aim of the company was to provide schools with online guidance for safety
policies after nearly two years of shifting to and from virtual learning.

"Research has shown that more than half of the student population nationwide have lacked the motivation and
engagement to successfully learn in a remote setting," he said in a statement. "Our goal for the School Safety Index
is to provide administrators with the accurate data insights they need to make well-informed decisions and safely
return both students and teachers to the classroom."

Gupta told Government Technology the platform asks administrators to describe their schools, local conditions, and
the layouts of each building and classroom in order to gauge the risk of spread. The platform is part of a suite of
health risk data tools offered by the company.

"We got our start by analyzing social determinants of health data down to specific locations, as they impact the
health outcomes and the cost for individuals, patients and populations in those locations," he said. "When COVID-
19 broke out, we developed a number of AI models and public health models to track the spread of the disease so
we could identify where the disease is going, how it's spreading and who is at risk of becoming sick from the
disease."

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 2
                          School Safety Index Predicts K-12 COVID Policy Effectiveness

According to Gupta, school and public health officials can use the platform to determine whether a classroom could
use plexiglass barriers or whether a school should shift to remote or hybrid learning, among other mitigation
strategies.

"Based on our understanding of the social determinants of health in that region, the COVID case counts and other
health outcomes of that region, we can assess the risk of disease transmission in the school, but with no COVID
mitigation put in place," he said. "Then we can assess the value of any mitigation, whether they're masks, social
distancing or reducing class sizes, or any changes that may take place."

Even though millions of students were vaccinated before returning to school this year, Gupta said the virus could
remain a threat to K-12 districts in the years to come as an endemic — a regularly occurring disease in the
population. Gupta said it's important for schools to look to data to mitigate the spread of other common school
illnesses such as the flu, to say nothing of future pandemics.

The index is among several similar data platforms available to schools online, including a COVID-19 K-12 School
Testing Impact Estimator developed by the data analytics company Mathematica, which measures the
effectiveness of school COVID-19 testing policies.

"What we need to do is start looking at how, in our everyday lives, we can operate schools," he said. "We have the
opportunity to adjust infrastructure to reduce the risk of disease transmission to not only address the current
pandemic, but maybe on a permanent basis reduce the spread of seasonal flu."

___ (c)2021 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.


Load-Date: October 12, 2021


  
