

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 2
                           Mount Sinai Launches Dept Of Artificial Intelligence And Human Health




     Mount Sinai Launches Dept Of Artificial Intelligence And Human Health
                                                    The Queens Gazette (New York)
                                                          October 13, 2021



Copyright 2021 The Service Advertising Group Inc.
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: FEATURES
Length: 726 words

Body


The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has launched a new department dedicated to advancing artificial
intelligence (AI) to transform health care, further positioning the Mount Sinai Health System as a leader in
providing patient care through pioneering innovations and technologies. The Department of Artificial Intelligence
and Human Health is the first department of its kind within a medical school in the United States.

The department's mission is to lead the artificial intelligence-driven transformation of health care through innovative
research, apply that knowledge to treatment in hospital and clinical settings, and provide personalized care for each
patient, which will expand Mount Sinai's impact on human health across the Health System and around the world.

 "Mount Sinai's AI enterprise and its collective entities will be the connective fabric linking and integrating our work
throughout the entire Health System, as we robustly collaborate with all our institutes, departments, and centers to
provide phenomenal patient care," said Thomas J. Fuchs, Dr.sc, Dean for Artificial Intelligence and Human Health,
Co-Director of the Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at Mount Sinai, and Professor of Computational
Pathology and Computer Science in the Department of Pathology at Icahn Mount Sinai. "The overarching goal of
the Department for AI and Human Health is to impact patients' health with AI. We will accomplish this by building
AI systems at scale from data representing Mount Sinai's diverse patient population. These systems will work
seamlessly across all hospitals and care units to support physicians, foster research, and most importantly help
patients' care and well-being."

 Dr. Fuchs, who will lead the Department, is a prominent scientist in the groundbreaking field of computational
pathology, with decades of experience in machine learning and artificial intelligence in health care. Together with
his team, he will guide the department in creating an "AI Fabric" that will integrate machine learning and AI-driven
decision-making throughout the Health System's eight hospitals. This effort will include creating a hub-and-satellite
model to make new tools and techniques available to all Mount Sinai physicians, and building an infrastructure for
high-performance computing and data access to improve Mount Sinai's diagnostic and treatment capabilities.

 "Mount Sinai has been on the forefront of the artificial intelligence revolution," said Dennis S. Charney, MD, Anne
and Joel Ehrenkranz Dean of Icahn Mount Sinai and President for Academic Affairs of the Mount Sinai Health
System. "We've made bold steps in recruiting the brightest minds, invested in leading-edge technology, and created
an infrastructure where discoveries are quickly translated to benefit patients and change practice. This Department

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 2
                      Mount Sinai Launches Dept Of Artificial Intelligence And Human Health

cements our commitment to further developing this field, charting new avenues, and making this bold future a
reality."

 As part of Mount Sinai's ongoing commitment to expand AI, the department will be located on four floors in a
completely redesigned and renovated space at 3 East 101st Street that includes areas for computational work and
advanced imaging modalities such as virtual and augmented reality. The Department of AI and Human Health is
also launching a campaign to recruit talented researchers, scientists, physicians, and students in the field.

 The new department continues to build on Mount Sinai's expertise and early adaptation of various forms of artificial
intelligence, including machine learning to develop novel diagnostics and treatments for diseases. Earlier this year,
Icahn Mount Sinai announced it will offer a new PhD concentration in Artificial Intelligence and Emerging
Technologies in Medicine as part of its PhD in Biomedical Sciences program starting in the fall of 2022. The
concentration will train future scientists in cutting-edge technologies, including AI, medical devices, robotic
machines, and sensors. The Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at Mount Sinai—a collaboration between the
Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Engineering in Potsdam, Germany, and the Mount Sinai Health System—formed
in 2019 to expand capabilities and create new tools of data science, biomedical and digital engineering, machine
learning, and AI, including wearable technology.


Load-Date: October 30, 2021


  
