

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                            Computer Science Department expands as student interest grows




          Computer Science Department expands as student interest grows
                                              Inside Vandy: Vanderbilt University
                                                  September 6, 2021 Monday



University Wire
Copyright 2021 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: CAMPUS; Pg. 1
Length: 882 words
Byline: Stephanie Ting Shunnar Virani

Body

The Computer Science Department is witnessing growth in its number of student majors, faculty numbers, research
opportunities and courses offerings. The department split from the Electrical Engineering Department in Fall 2021 to
better accommodate growing interest.

Per Julie Johnson, associate chair of the Computer Science Department and director of undergraduate studies in
computer science, this is largely an administrative change and will be seen by students through growth in faculty.

Fall 2021 will mark the start of the second year of Destination Vanderbilt, a three-year $100 million program that
aims to kindle a growing interest in the field. The program's goal is to hire around 20 new computer science faculty
members, adding to the previous 20 faculty members. The Computer Science Department has already hired seven
people this past year and hopes to hire another seven to eight new faculty members in the upcoming year,
according to Johnson.

"We're doubling the size of our faculty, which is very exciting," Johnson stated. "In the meantime, the number of our
students has practically doubled as well."

Since 2019, there has been an approximately 29 percent increase in computer science majors. In 2019, 451
students from the School of Engineering majored in computer science, 103 students outside of the School of
Engineering majored in computer science and 130 students minored in computer science, according to Johnson. As
of Fall 2021, 569 students from the School of Engineering are majoring in computer science, 145 students outside
of the School of Engineering are majoring in computer science and 140 students are minoring in computer science.

"The minors numbers aren't jumping in any big leaps and bounds," Johnson said. "It's the major that obviously has
just exploded."

According to Johnson, the rapid growth in computer science is due to the subject having many "flavors" and being
"ubiquitous" in a diverse range of careers, spanning from data science and software engineering to
entrepreneurship. Karolina Groszewska, a sophomore majoring in computer science, also stated that more majors
are starting to use computer science classes as requirements, inspiring more interest in the field.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                         Computer Science Department expands as student interest grows

"We're encouraged to take different classes, but once you take the CS intro class, it kind of encourages people to
switch or take on a double major [in computer science]," Zakariyya Al-Quran, a junior majoring in computer
engineering, added.

Al-Qurran expressed excitement about the diverse research interests that Destination Vanderbilt hopes to curate
with its new faculty hires.

"[These professors] have been doing [research] their whole life, so it would be cool to have those professors, who
are teaching us, be the pioneers of their expansion project," Al-Qurran said.

When hiring new faculty, Destination Vanderbilt leaders-who are part of the Office of the Provost-target four aspects
of computer science. These areas include autonomous and intelligent human-AI-machine systems and urban
environments, cybersecurity and resilience, computing and AI for health, medicine and surgery and design of next-
generation systems, structures, materials and manufacturing.

Johnson said hiring new faculty members will also enhance the reach and depth of computer science research at
Vanderbilt.

"Providing opportunities to all students to get research is a good opportunity to keep expanding skillsets,"
Groszewska said. "CS professors foster extracurricular involvement or having more CS professors able to help with
external projects or willing and able to take on young undergraduates helps a lot in diversifying students' interests
and helping a variety of students explore different fields and the like."

With the new hires entering, class offerings for students have also increased. In Fall 2020, the Computer Science
Department offered 22 courses which increased to 29 courses offered in Spring 2021. In Fall 2021, it will offer 29
courses.

Johnson also mentioned the increase of depth courses, which are advanced, specific computer science classes
such as Cyber Security and Artificial Intelligence. The department offered 11 of these courses in Fall 2020 and will
offer 18 in Fall 2021.

"Once [the seven new professors] have kind of integrated into the system, they'll start teaching undergrad courses
next spring and the following fall," Johnson said. "So, that's probably seven more depth courses coming up."

Johnson emphasized the importance of computer science and encouraged students to take a computer science
course, even if it doesn't meet a degree requirement.

"We work on being good teachers and we have an army of teaching assistants to help you," Johnson said. "
Nothing should stop you from taking that first intro class."

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare via EmailPrint
    •   computer science
    •   destination vanderbilt
    •   electrical engineering
    •   Julie Johnson
    •   VUSE
    •   Zakariyya Al-Quran
About the Contributor

Anjali Chanda

Anjali Chanda ('23) is from Beverly, MA. She is majoring in sociology and English with a focus in creative writing. In
the past, she wrote for the Arts and Society Section of the Greyhound Newspaper at Loyola University Maryland. In

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 3
                       Computer Science Department expands as student interest grows

her free time, she can be found painting, writing stories, or rewatching New Girl. She can be reached at [email
protected]


Load-Date: September 7, 2021


  
