

                                                                               Page 1 of 4
         TALK TO ME THE CHATGPT BOT IS PUSHING GENERATIVE AI FORWARD, WITH POWERFUL
                              POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS




TALK TO ME; THE CHATGPT BOT IS PUSHING GENERATIVE AI FORWARD,
      WITH POWERFUL POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS
                                               Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                               March 26, 2023 Sunday
                                                TWO STAR EDITION



Copyright 2023 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: HEALTH; Pg. H-1
Length: 1723 words
Byline: Hanna Webster Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

Body


Asked to pull up a few studies on chronic fatigue syndrome from the past six months, ChatGPT responded with
confidence, listing five scientific studies published in 2022 and 2023, complete with author, year and publication.

But there was a caveat: Every study the AI-driven chatbot cited was made up or could not be found online.

Shortly after its launch by OpenAI in November, ChatGPT shocked users with its breadth of knowledge. It became
the fastest-growing consumer app to date, with 100 million users just two months after its release, per UBS data
reported by Reuters.

OpenAI is upfront about ChatGPT's current limitations.

When signing up for the artificial intelligence tool, users are alerted that it has not been trained on information past
2021, a factor that could have led to the aforementioned errors.

So the same question was run again, refined to pull from studies published between 2015 and 2019. It still yielded
studies that didn't exist.

After posing a hypothetical about an enlargement in the abdomen and concern for cancer (mirroring some of what
the general public might search when seeking medical advice), the bot responded with surprising clarity. It was
thorough, almost compassionate.

ChatGPT is still evolving - a version four was released earlier this month. But it could be useful in health care
settings, potentially freeing up doctors and other care providers to be there for patients in new ways.

It runs on software created by OpenAI, a San Francisco-based company originally started as a nonprofit and co-
founded in 2015 by Greg Brockman, Ilya Sutskever and numerous others.

                                                                              Page 2 of 4
        TALK TO ME THE CHATGPT BOT IS PUSHING GENERATIVE AI FORWARD, WITH POWERFUL
                             POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS

Brockman is a San-Francisco-based researcher who was formerly the CTO for Stripe, and Sutskever is a Canadian
computer scientist who previously worked at Google. OpenAI's mission, they say, is to "ensure that artificial general
intelligence … benefits all of humanity."

Tesla CEO Elon Musk was also on OpenAI's founding board; he resigned in 2018 but remains a donor. Microsoft is
a major investor, pledging a multibillion dollar investment earlier this year.

OpenAI's ChatGPT-4, available for paid subscribers, is expected to be more accurate and more precise, amid
concerns that the tool occasionally misdiagnoses conditions and fabricates sources.

The success of the generative AI tool has pushed other tech companies to create their own versions of advanced
chatbots. While computer scientists and ethics experts have raised concerns about privacy and the need for
stringent guidelines, ChatGPT may have a home in the health care setting, starting, say, with administrative tasks.

A helping AI hand

Experts assure that the end goal is not to replace doctors, and ChatGPT is a far cry from being involved in real
patient diagnosis any time soon. There are, however, ways that AI can offload work from nurses and other staff in
the short-term.

Note writing is one of these ways, something F. Perry Wilson, an associate professor of medicine at Yale
University, called "low-hanging fruit" in terms of ChatGPT's feasible implementation in the foreseeable future.
Wilson specializes in using data-science tools to target effective patient medical care.

"The medical note is highly structured," he said. "It's necessary for billing purposes, and it takes time."

Currently, the medical scribe position typically is filled by pre-med and medical students. ChatGPT taking over this
task could reduce the "busywork of medicine," though Wilson, a nephrologist, urged that a physician should check
the final product for accuracy.

This may also force doctors and nurses to write better, giving clearer explanations. For instance, when asked to
explain rheumatoid arthritis in lay terms, it responded:

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a type of chronic (long-term) disease that affects your joints. It's an autoimmune
disorder, which means that your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake.

In the case of RA, your immune system attacks the lining of your joints, which causes inflammation (swelling,
redness, and warmth). This inflammation can damage your joints and cause pain, stiffness, and reduced mobility. If
left untreated, RA can lead to deformities in your joints and even affect other organs in your body.

RA can affect anyone at any age, but it's more common in women and usually begins in middle age. It's a lifelong
condition, but there are treatments available that can help manage symptoms and prevent joint damage. If you think
you may have RA, it's important to talk to your doctor for a proper diagnosis and treatment plan.

Ari Lightman, a professor of digital media and marketing at Heinz College of Carnegie Mellon University, said
ChatGPT could technically be used tomorrow to help turn information from a doctor into a story to better
communicate medical terminology and clearly explain a concept to patients.

Lightman created one of the first courses on social and digital health for physicians in 2011. Usage of this
technology in the medical setting could show doctors better ways to frame explanations for patients, as well as push
doctors to individualize their write-ups.

"You'd have to distinguish yourself from an AI," said Wilson. "You'd have to write like a human."

Future versions of ChatGPT, he said, could also act as an extra "set of eyes" when scanning patients' imaging
results.

                                                                              Page 3 of 4
        TALK TO ME THE CHATGPT BOT IS PUSHING GENERATIVE AI FORWARD, WITH POWERFUL
                             POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS

"Radiologists work in the dark all day," Wilson said. "They're experts at this, but stuff still gets missed." ChatGPT
could scan an image for abnormalities in addition to what the radiologist found and send an alert if it catches
anything for the radiologist to review.

Wilson and colleagues are currently running a clinical trial to better understand whether an alert system could help
doctors prescribe more of a certain class of medications, called Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists, or MRAs,
to treat a type of heart failure. According to Wilson, these medications are safe for widespread use but rarely
prescribed.

The researchers hypothesize that sending an alert will increase the prescription of these medications and ultimately
reduce deaths from heart failure. The alert could say something like: "Your patient has been diagnosed with heart
failure. MRAs are safe and effective at treating heart failure. Would you like to prescribe this medication?" And a bot
could send it.

ChatGPT could also be utilized for online mental health care, as therapists are in short supply.

The opportunity for conversation can help people work through hardships, said Joanna Bryson, a professor of
ethics and technology at the Hertie School in Berlin, Germany.

"Talking to someone is essential to being human," she said. Rather than replace therapists entirely, ChatGPT could
fill a gap where care is needed, as millions process collective trauma from three years in the COVID-19 pandemic.

Privacy matters

Still, there are concerns over ethical uses of the technology - and privacy.

"We have to worry about cybersecurity," said Bryson. "We can't assume it will be in place."

OpenAI CEO Sam Altman, in a mid-March interview with ABC News, ruminated on having a healthy fear of the
tech. "I think people should be happy that we're a little bit scared of this," Altman said.

The United States does not have a centralized monitoring body, equivalent to something like the European Union's
General Data Protection Regulation, which aims to protect individual rights to data privacy and to promote
transparency of personal data storage and processing.

The U.S. does, however, participate in the International Medical Device Regulators Forum, which formed in 2011 to
help apply standardization and regulatory oversight to medical devices. Participating countries include but are not
limited to Canada, China, South Korea and Australia. The organization has a working group for AI use in medical
settings.

Bryson does worry that the tech companies creating these AI tools aren't used to the same oversight or liability of
medical systems.

To her knowledge, OpenAI and Microsoft are "working really hard to be compliant, and are doing a lot of the right
things." But when other versions of ChatGPT emerge from startup companies, there won't be a General Data
Protection Regulation to hold them accountable in a uniform way.

In a related concern, Anh Nguyen, a Carnegie Mellon University assistant professor of economics who studies
information flow in health care systems, wonders about the implications of how chatbots are trained. If ChatGPT,
for instance, were to be exposed to previous doctor/patient interactions, what health privacy considerations are in
place to protect sensitive patient data from getting leaked?

AI is vulnerable to misinformation, too, said Nguyen. When trained on biased data, it treats that data with the same
weight as unbiased data - in other words, it can't detect if data has been manipulated.

                                                                              Page 4 of 4
        TALK TO ME THE CHATGPT BOT IS PUSHING GENERATIVE AI FORWARD, WITH POWERFUL
                             POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS

"This is too much of a phenomenally powerful tool not to be misused," said Lightman. "It's inevitable that it will be
used for bad."

Bryson echoed that statement: "I really, really worry about this technology being misused."

Is it worth it? Absolutely, Lightman said.

Healthy fears

The general population is not in agreement. In a December survey of more than 11,000 Americans conducted by
Pew Research Center, 60% reported discomfort with their provider relying on an AI tool in their health care.

"AI is difficult to understand, therefore scary," said Wilson. "The cultural zeitgeist about it is informed by 'The
Terminator,' '2001: A Space Odyssey,' 'Ex Machina.' It speaks to a deep human fear of a loss of autonomy."

Lightman concurred, referencing the "mystique" surrounding AI. "It looks like magic - it's not. It's based on training
data it was exposed to over many years."

The best way to chip away at fears? Play around with it, said Wilson. "Experiencing it firsthand takes the mystery
out. This isn't an actual thinking being behind the screen."

Wilson, crediting a graduate student for the idea, used the analogy of nurses on rounds: When they put their heads
together to tackle a problem, ChatGPT could be "just another head." Ultimately, they recommend that a human
make the final decision when it comes to direct patient care.

"It's best that this technology is used in tandem with human scrutiny," said Wilson. "There's very little appetite in
medicine to take humans out entirely."

Hanna Webster: hwebster@post-gazette.com



Graphic


PHOTO: Shutterstock: Open AI launched its ChatGPT chatbot in November, and it quickly became the fastest-
growing consumer app to date.

PHOTO: Associated Press: OpenAI CEO Sam Altman.


Load-Date: March 26, 2023


  
