

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
         Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market to Watch: Spotlight on Firms Like OrCam , Babylon ,
                               Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel Therapeutics -....




Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market to Watch: Spotlight on Firms
      Like OrCam, Babylon, Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel
                            Therapeutics - The Courier
                                              The Courier: Monmouth University
                                                      January 31, 2021 Sunday



University Wire
Copyright 2021 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved

Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1178 words

Body

The growing aging population, coupled with rising investment in the healthcare ecosystem, is expected to impact
overall market growth over the forecast period positively. Developed nations have been facing this demographic
challenge and have been investing in bringing affordable and advanced healthcare systems to the people, thereby
providing impetus to the market. X-ray imaging is being widely used to detect lung and breast cancer.

Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market research is an intelligence report with meticulous efforts undertaken
to study the right and valuable information. The data which has been looked upon is done considering both, the
existing top players and the upcoming competitors.

Get        Sample        Copy        Of       This        Report                   With        Global            Industry
Analysis: www.a2zmarketresearch.com/sample?reportId=64867

Key Players Included Are: OrCam, Babylon, Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel Therapeutics, Ada Health
GmbH, GNS Healthcare, Zebra Medical Vision, Qventus Inc, IDx Technologies, K Health, Prognos, Medopad,
Viz.ai, Voxel Technology, Renalytix AI plc, Beijing Pushing Technology Co. Ltd, PAIGE, mPulse Mobile, Suki AI,
BERG LLC, Zealth, OWKIN, Your.MD.

Business strategies of the key players and the new entering market industries are studied in detail. Well explained
SWOT analysis, revenue share and contact information are shared in this report analysis. It also provides market
information in terms of development and its capacities.

"Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market is growing at a High CAGR during the forecast period 2021-2027.
The increasing interest of the individuals in this industry is that the major reason for the expansion of this market".

Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market research report offers:
     •    Market definition of the global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging market along with the analysis of
          different influencing factors like drivers, restraints, and opportunities.
     •    Extensive research on the competitive landscape of global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 4
        Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market to Watch: Spotlight on Firms Like OrCam , Babylon ,
                              Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel Therapeutics -....

    •   Identification and analysis of micro and macro factors that are and will effect on the growth of the market.
    •   A comprehensive list of key market players operating in the global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging
        market.
    •   Analysis of the different market segments such as type, size, applications, and end-users.
    •   It offers a descriptive analysis of demand-supply chaining in the global Artificial Intelligence in Medical
        Imaging market.
    •   Statistical analysis of some significant economics facts
    •   Figures, charts, graphs, pictures to describe the market clearly.

Various factors are responsible for the market's growth trajectory, which are studied at length in the report. In
addition, the report lists down the restraints that are posing threat to the global Artificial Intelligence in Medical
Imaging market. It also gauges the bargaining power of suppliers and buyers, threat from new entrants and product
substitute, and the degree of competition prevailing in the market. The influence of the latest government guidelines
is also analyzed in detail in the report. It studies the Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging market's trajectory
between forecast periods.

Enquire For Customized Report or Specific Requirements:www.a2zmarketresearch.com/enquiry?reportId=64867

Regions Covered in the Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market Report 2021:

· The Middle East and Africa (GCC Countries and Egypt)

· North America (the United States, Mexico, and Canada)

· South America (Brazil etc.)

· Europe (Turkey, Germany, Russia UK, Italy, France, etc.)

· Asia-Pacific (Vietnam, China, Malaysia, Japan, Philippines, Korea, Thailand, India, Indonesia, and Australia)

The cost analysis of the Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market has been performed while keeping
in view manufacturing expenses, labor cost, and raw materials and their market concentration rate, suppliers, and
price trend. Other factors such as Supply chain, downstream buyers, and sourcing strategy have been assessed to
provide a complete and in-depth view of the market. Buyers of the report will also be exposed to a study on market
positioning with factors such as target client, brand strategy, and price strategy taken into consideration.

Table of Content

Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market Report 2021 - Growth, Trend and Forecast to 2027

Chapter 1 Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market Overview

Chapter 2 Global Economic Impact on Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Industry

Chapter 3 Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market Competition by Manufacturers

Chapter 4 Global Production, Revenue (Value) by Region (2014-2021)

Chapter 5 Global Supply (Production), Consumption, Export, Import by Regions (2014-2021)

Chapter 6 Global Production, Revenue (Value), Price Trend by Type

Chapter 7 Global Market Analysis by Application

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 4
        Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market to Watch: Spotlight on Firms Like OrCam , Babylon ,
                              Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel Therapeutics -....

Chapter 8 Manufacturing Cost Analysis

Chapter 9 Industrial Chain, Sourcing Strategy and Downstream Buyers

Chapter 10 Marketing Strategy Analysis, Distributors/Traders

Chapter 11 Market Effect Factors Analysis

Chapter 12 Global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market Forecast (2021-2027)

Chapter 13 Appendix

Key questions answered in the report include:
    •   What will be the market size and the growth rate by the end of the forecast period?
    •   What are the key Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market trends impacting the growth of the
        market?
    •   What are the potential growth opportunities and threats faced by the leading competitors in the market?
    •   What are the key outcomes of Porter's five forces analysis and the SWOT analysis of the key players
        functioning in the global Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market?
    •   This report gives all the information regarding industry Overview, analysis and revenue of this market.
    •   What are the market opportunities and threats faced by the vendors in the global Artificial Intelligence in
        Medical Imaging market?

Get Great Discount On The First Purchase Of This Report: www.a2zmarketresearch.com/discount?reportId=64867

If you have any special requirements, please let us know and we will offer you the report as you want.

About A2Z Market Research:

The A2Z Market Research library provides syndication reports from market researchers around the world. Ready-
to-buy syndication Market research studies will help you find the most relevant business intelligence.

Our Research Analyst Provides business insights and market research reports for large and small businesses.

The company helps clients build business policies and grow in that market area. A2Z Market Research is not only
interested in industry reports dealing with telecommunications, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, financial services,
energy, technology, real estate, logistics, F & B, media, etc. but also your company data, country profiles, trends,
information and analysis on the sector of your interest.

Contact Us:

Roger Smith

1887 WHITNEY MESA DR HENDERSON, NV 89014

sales@a2zmarketresearch.com

+1 775 237 4147


Load-Date: January 31, 2021

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 4
     Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging Market to Watch: Spotlight on Firms Like OrCam , Babylon ,
                           Freenome, Clarify Health Solutions, BioXcel Therapeutics -....



