

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
                             Stressed about the election? You're not alone. How to stay calm.




          Stressed about the election? You're not alone. How to stay calm.
                                                        USA Today Online
                                                        November 4, 2022



Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp All Rights Reserved

Length: 1154 words
Byline: Josh Peter and David Oliver, USA TODAY

Body


With the midterm election less than a week away, scores of Americans divided by their support for Republicans or
Democrats also are united – by stress.

And it makes sense why they are. "The midterms determine the balance of power in the Senate and Congress. This
has, arguably, significant consequences," says Mona Eshaiker, licensed therapist. "With the ever-increasing
political polarization in the U.S., every election can feel like an 'us vs. them' battle, where our beliefs and values are
potentially on the chopping block."

It seems to have only gotten worse, too. "Research suggests that election anxiety increased between 2016 and
2020," says Marsha Brown, a licensed psychologist. "With growing fear for the future of human rights, health care,
the economy and other life issues, it seems election anxiety may have risen again since the previous election
cycle."

Stress triggers the release of cortisol, the so-called stress hormone, William Heckman, executive director of the the
American Institute of Stress, has told USA TODAY. This affects mood, motivation and fear.

Link to Image

“It works with parts of your brain and the physiology of your body,’’ he says. “You need some of that (cortisol) to be
motivated. But too much of that, you live in a state of ongoing anxiety, which is very bad for you.’’

Still, the Nov. 8 elections will affect everyone differently. "Different people have had different experiences in the
past," says Smriti Joshi, chief psychologist at Wysa, an AI mental health platform. "And there have been genuine
triggers, which can be leading people to feel worried and stressed about the upcoming elections."

Keep these tips in mind for combating stress before, during and after Election Day.

What is burnout? It starts with work and while self-care can help, it isn't just your problem to solve

'Master your morning'

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                          Stressed about the election? You're not alone. How to stay calm.

Nefertiti Nowell, a licensed clinical professional counselor in the Chicago metropolitan area, subscribes to this
motto: “If you can master your morning, you can master your day.’’

She recommends brief stretching exercises and writing down something you’re grateful for – preferably a new
source of gratitude every day. Yoga, deep breathing and meditation can be added to the morning ritual, but it’s not
necessary, according to Nowell.

"I’ve learned that if it’s anything over five minutes, people are less likely to do it,’’ she says. “Everybody has three
minutes to get their blood flowing. And so if we take those three minutes to do that, then it really gets us centered
for that day.

“It’s more about mental health than it is just physical health. It’s the getting the blood flowing for the body but even
for you to say: ‘I have control over something. I’ve got control over three minutes of my morning.’ ”

Brown adds: "Be sure to engage in activities that replenish your mental, physical and emotional stores. Identify the
activities that fill you with energy and make time to complete them. Not sure what you find restorative? Think of
activities you’ve always wanted to try or those you enjoyed as a child. Finding activities that work for you is a
process that usually involves trial and error."

Interesting: Conservative men dominate the politics of abortion access. Where are the progressive men?

Turn off your news alerts

Yes, it's OK if you need to. "Ensuring the hour before you go to bed is free from electronics is helpful to wind down
and keep the nervous system regulated," Eshaiker says. "Similarly, you can limit yourself to media blocks
throughout the day. For example, only checking the news for 30 minutes twice a day. This way you are less likely to
(doom) scroll or go into an anxious spiral."

Also remember that you don't need to talk about the election. "It may also help to set boundaries with family, friends
and co-workers who try to pull you into political conversations," Brown says.

Listen to your body: Your body is trying to tell you something

Channel your stress

Instead of pacing your home afraid, if you have the bandwidth, go forth and galvanize voters in your community.
"Many individuals get a sense of purpose and strength by channeling their anxiety into action," Eshaiker says. "This
can look like attending a town hall, volunteering at the polls, canvassing, protesting, information sharing, attending
workshops and seminars. Being part of a group can also provide a sense of support and community."

And of course, vote. Eshaiker adds: "This can help alleviate feelings of stress and gain a sense of control. Although
we cannot control the outcome of the elections, every vote truly matters. After voting, many people express feeling
empowered and accomplished."

Heads up: Amid midterm voting, Biden warns of 'chaos,' fears of political violence ahead of Nov. 8 election

What to do after the election is over

Chloe Carmichael, a licensed clinical psychologist in New York, recommends making plans for after you vote – for
anything from having lunch with a friend or exercising.

She also suggested writing a one-page journal entry recording your thoughts and feelings about the election.

                                                                                                           Page 3 of 3
                          Stressed about the election? You're not alone. How to stay calm.

“Sometimes writing it all own can relieve our brain of the burden of feeling like you have to keep all of those points
active,’’ Carmichael says. “And thinking about the idea of potentially that page being passed on down to our
children or our children’s children can also help to put the whole event into a little bit of perspective.’’

Remember too that politicians are people and contain multitudes. "Black-and-white thinking can fuel the flames of
anxiety," Eshaiker says. "No one is 'all good' or 'all bad,' and no situation is 'all good' or 'all bad.' Finding the gray
area in any political election can be a helpful way to embody a balanced perspective."

Important: Culture war issues like abortion and trans rights are shaping midterm elections

Once the day is done, Eshaiker suggests a media cleanse: "This can be as little as one day without looking at the
news or social media. Or a week depending on what you think you may need. The point here is to help regulate
your nervous system after election season to get your mind and body back to homeostasis."

Consider professional help if stress persists. "Explore what exactly about the election is causing you stress. Is there
one issue or one politician in particular you are preoccupied by? Oftentimes, when we find ourselves fixated over an
issue, it can mean there’s something deeper going on," Eshaiker says.

We have about 40,000 thoughts a day, Joshi says, and our thoughts are not facts.

"It's very much possible that we can work through these opinions, through these thoughts, with the help of a
professional or self-help techniques that you may pick up from various applications or from books."

In case you missed then: A majority of Americans say 2020 election is 'significant source of stress'

This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Stressed about the election? You're not alone. How to stay calm.


Load-Date: November 8, 2022


  
