

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 3
                                            Big Tech swallows most of the hot AI startups




                            Big Tech swallows most of the hot AI startups
                                                        Chicago Daily Herald
                                                      March 22, 2020 Sunday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3
       EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition



Copyright 2020 Paddock Publications, Inc.

Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 0
Length: 1260 words
Byline: Dina Bass and Joshua Brustein Bloomberg

Body


In 2016, Seattle-based startup Turi was helping almost 100 customers create and manage software that uses
machine learning, a powerful type of artificial intelligence. Its technology was so promising that Apple Inc. snapped
it up for $200 million. The deal was a triumph for investors and founders, but one backer thought Turi — and the
broader tech industry — might be better off if the startup had spurned Apple's advances. Matt McIlwain, managing
director at Madrona Venture Group, said it's important that at least some emerging tech businesses remain
independent, rather than falling into the arms of Apple, Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc., Google or Microsoft Corp.

"It is economically beneficial to society to have more stand-alone, independent companies. We generally think that's
better than just having these companies consolidated into larger ones," McIlwain said. "There have to be some in
each era that are willing to take the risk and stand the test of time as independent companies so we have the next
generation of leading platforms." Regulators and lawmakers are investigating whether the largest U.S. technology
companies have become too powerful. Acquisitions are a major part of the probes, with the Federal Trade
Commission re-examining hundreds of small deals from the previous decade made by Apple, Amazon, Facebook,
Google and Microsoft. Artificial intelligence is a prime example of an important technology field where the majority
of promising startups have been gobbled up, frequently ending public availability of any products they created. Last
year saw a record 231 acquisitions of AI startups, up from 42 in 2014, according to data from CB Insights. Apple
has been the top acquirer since 2010, followed by Google, Microsoft, Facebook, Intel Corp. and Amazon. "If big
tech companies buy them all up, they eliminate these future competitors, and have a chance of actually owning the
winners," said Sean Gourley, chief executive officer of machine-learning startup Primer AI. "It's a real shame. We
lost something. There may have been different approaches in this field, but now we only have what these larger
companies decide." Bloomberg Beta, the venture capital arm of Bloomberg LP, is an investor in Primer AI. It's
particularly important to have a broad, diverse community developing AI because the technology is informing more
decisions and has been susceptible to bias, according to researchers. Representatives for Turi and Apple declined
to comment, as did Amazon, Facebook, Google and Microsoft. Apart from consolidating promising technology,
many of the acquisitions were done to amass talent. There's a shortage of workers with experience in deep learning
and machine learning, and many companies, not just in tech, are competing for these specialists. Google's 2013
purchase of DNNResearch brought deep-learning godfather Geoffrey Hinton to the internet giant. In 2014, Google

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 3
                                    Big Tech swallows most of the hot AI startups

also snapped up DeepMind, a London research outfit led by Demis Hassabis that used software to beat the best
players at the strategy game Go and is working on health applications for AI. The industry's deal spree has raised
concern that the biggest technology companies have a lock on brain power in a field that's considered critical to the
future of computing, global competitiveness and even military supremacy. "It's the most important technology we
will see in our lifetime," said Diego Oppenheimer, CEO of Seattle-based Algorthimia, which provides a marketplace
for machine-learning algorithms. "When you look at it that way, if it is concentrated on the few, it's going to be really
hard to compete with those few." At least some of the motivation behind the acquisition of smaller AI firms has to be
more than talent hoarding, according to Frederic Laurin, partnership director at Mila, a prominent Montreal-based
deep learning research lab. "The other potential explanation is they see those firms as competitors," he said. For
startups, selling can be the best option when promising technology is failing to become a real business. Joining a
larger company can provide a bigger audience for a startup's ideas, along with more resources to develop products
quicker. Giants such as Google and Facebook have massive data sets that are crucial for training AI models, for
instance. "It's easy to get funding for an AI startup, or at least it was. Easier than translating an idea into revenue,
so the exit often becomes an acquisition," said Babak Hodjat, who invented some of the technology that became
Apple's Siri digital assistant and sold parts of his AI company Sentient Technologies to outsourcing giant Cognizant
Technology Solutions Corp. last year. Before Apple bought Turi, venture capital firm Opus Capital backed the
startup because it had an "awesome product and a very technically sharp team," said Preeti Rathi, who was at
Opus at the time. But the market wasn't ready for the technology, she said. "When a good team meets a not-ready
market, it takes a lot of capital," said Rathi, who is now a general partner at Icon Ventures. "Startups don't typically
have that much cash," so the Apple sale was a good outcome for Turi, she added. One new reason AI startups look
to be acquired by a big patron is the cost of computing power. As AI models get more complex, startups are paying
a lot for cloud computing services to train and run those models. And they often pay their rivals, Amazon, Microsoft
and Google, which are the dominant cloud providers. This is pricing smaller firms out of the space, said Laurin of
Mila, the Montreal-based deep-learning lab. Even Mila, with 450 researchers and support from several universities,
can't keep up sometimes, Laurin said. Yoshua Bengio, a deep-learning pioneer and scientific director at Mila, has
told Laurin that there are research papers from Google and Facebook that Mila can't replicate because it doesn't
have access to the same computing power. In 2015, Elon Musk, Sam Altman and other technologists helped start
nonprofit research group OpenAI with a $1 billion commitment because they were concerned about big tech
companies dominating such an important technology. Now OpenAI has started a for-profit arm and taken a $1
billion investment from Microsoft partially to fund the intensive computing needs its work requires. Still, some
promising AI startups have stayed independent, and new ones are being formed all the time. There were 2,235
venture capital AI funding deals last year worth a total of $26.6 billion, according to CB Insights, which also counted
24 AI unicorns — companies valued at $1 billion or more. "New startups are emerging every day, some of which
are building large businesses and will emerge as leaders," said Rathi. "This is despite the current generation of
incumbent competitors — Google, Amazon, etc. — that are quite formidable." Madrona's McIlwain casts an envious
eye at data and machine-learning software firm Databricks which is now valued at more than $6 billion and has a
customer list that includes Cisco Systems Inc., HP and ViacomCBS. Turi may have become more valuable if it too
had stayed independent, he said, but it also could have gone worse. It's been a hard road for other AI
independents. Employees at Clarifai, founded in 2013, were initially confident they had found a defensible niche.
Instead, the company struggled to maintain momentum. Last year, the startup cut about 20% of its staff, according
to two people familiar with the situation. Clarifai Founder and CEO, Matt Zeiler, didn't respond to requests for
comment.



Graphic


Regulators and lawmakers are investigating whether the largest U.S. technology companies have become too
powerful. Acquisitions are a major part of the probes, with the Federal Trade Commission re-examining hundreds of
small deals from the previous decade made by Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Google and Microsoft. (AP Photo/Kathy
Willens, File)

                                                                            Page 3 of 3
                            Big Tech swallows most of the hot AI startups


Load-Date: March 23, 2020


  
