

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                                    Dr. Jamal Lawrence Announced As GRIT 2024 Keynote




                    Dr. Jamal Lawrence Announced As GRIT 2024 Keynote
                                                    The Savannah Tribune (GA)
                                                       December 27, 2023



Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 The Savannah Tribune

Section: FRONT PAGE
Length: 410 words

Body


The Creative Coast is excited to announce Dr. Jamal Lawrence, MD, as a GRIT 2024 keynote speaker. The annual
two-day GRIT Conference unites the region's entrepreneurs, technologists, creatives, and visionaries over inspiring
keynote sessions, panel discussions, and workshops. GRIT 2024 is set to take place from February 29th to March
1st at the iconic Savannah Civic Center in Savannah, Georgia.

Dr. Jamal Lawrence, MD is a double board-certified Family Medicine and Lifestyle Medicine Physician Leader.
Recognized nationally as a 40 under 40 Leader in Minority Health and a Health Equity Achieved through Lifestyle
Medicine Scholar, he is also the founder of Harvest Health MD, Savannah, Georgia's first black-owned and only
maleowned and operated direct primary care practice. During his training, Dr. Lawrence became concerned with
the conflict between the level of care his patients needed and the unrealistic expectations the current healthcare
system places on doctors while taking care of their patients in limited settings. Harvest Health MD seeks to provide
high-quality, personalized, transparent, and cost-effective care to small businesses that traditionally do not have the
resources to provide employees with the healthcare experience that every person deserves.

In addition to Dr. Lawrence's keynote talk, the event will feature numerous panel discussions and workshops on
topics aligning with this year's conference theme. The theme, "Leap into the Future," celebrates the Leap Year with
a vision toward tomorrow's innovations. Recently announced panels include Mindset Mastery: Balancing Drive &
Wellbeing in Entrepreneurship, Sweaty Startups: The Fusion of Tech and Traditional Trades, Health Tech
Horizons: AI & New Frontiers in Medicine, and Women in Breakout Roles.

The GRIT Conference will continue to announce speakers and panels at www.thegritconference.com. Be sure to
follow @gritconference on social media for regular updates.

Reserve your spot by December 31st for an Early Bird ticket rate of $149; after this date, general admission will be
$249. Similarly, our Early Bird VIP offer, at $249 (usually $349), ends on the same date. The VIP Ticket includes
access to the VIP Lounge, a unique sidecar lunch, and an evening reception with key conference figures on
February 28th, from 5:30pm-8:00pm, along with full conference access.

For more information about the conference and to purchase tickets, visit www.thegritconference.com.

                                                                              Page 2 of 2
                          Dr. Jamal Lawrence Announced As GRIT 2024 Keynote



Graphic


Dr. Jamal Lawrence, MD Dr. Jamal Lawrence, MD


Load-Date: December 28, 2023


  
