

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 3
                           PITTSBURGH REGION READY FOR SUPPLY CHAIN INVESTMENT




         PITTSBURGH REGION READY FOR SUPPLY CHAIN INVESTMENT
                                               Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                              January 28, 2022 Friday
                                                 SOONER EDITION



Copyright 2022 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: OPINION; Pg. A-8
Length: 906 words
Byline: Matt Smith

Body


The extended supply chain crunch is impacting families and businesses alike.

From cars to computers to materials, it has been difficult to get the things we need when we need them.

Our manufacturers and businesses have been working overtime to develop solutions and get their products in
customers' hands. And the federal government has made this a priority as well.

That is why we are especially encouraged by President Joe Biden's visit to our region this week.

We have been fortunate to host key federal policymakers who have toured Pittsburgh's companies, institutions of
higher education and state-of-the-art facilities, including training centers for the building trades. We have welcomed
the opportunity to tell the story of the 10-county Pittsburgh region's economic re-emergence and our leadership in
autonomy and robotics/AI, energy, life sciences, health and manufacturing.

Now, our region is well positioned to act as a model for federal investment to address world-scale issues - including
supply chain problems.

Washington recently made a significant investment in our country by passing the bipartisan infrastructure bill. Here
at home, the funding will fix our roads and bridges, reinvigorate our transit network, help support mobility systems of
the future and move people, goods and products faster and more safely and efficiently.

Thanks to the leadership of Mr. Biden and leaders from the Pittsburgh region including Sen. Bob Casey, Rep.
Conor Lamb, Rep. Mike Doyle and key stakeholders, our region recently secured nearly $1 billion for vital inland
waterway infrastructure. Further investment in other modes of transportation will be transformative for our region.

Now it's our turn to help the federal government as it confronts a historic supply chain bottleneck. We know that we
need stronger, more resilient and sustainable infrastructure to move goods and products to market.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 3
                       PITTSBURGH REGION READY FOR SUPPLY CHAIN INVESTMENT

As we look to the next phase of infrastructure investment opportunities, we have projects in the Pittsburgh region
that can help ease the supply chain crisis. With federal partnership and discretionary funding from the infrastructure
bill, these projects can become a reality and serve as a model for the country.

These projects are ready-to-go and ripe for federal investment.

For years, our region has sought to expand American-based manufacturing, and we have led the effort to move
more manufacturing back to our shores. With a bottlenecked supply chain, this has never been more important.

Leading institutions, from nonprofits to institutions of higher education to businesses, have come together with a
shared vision for the Hazelwood Green project. A 178-acre river's edge brownfield redevelopment, Hazelwood
Green is poised to be an innovation anchor for the manufacturing ecosystem - locally and beyond.

When completed, it will house worker training and businesses focused on robotics, advanced manufacturing and
life sciences. Investments in the surrounding infrastructure will accelerate business growth and new manufacturing
in the region.

At Pittsburgh International Airport, Neighborhood 91 is at the ready to serve as a reshoring model for
manufacturing. In addition to workforce and backlogs, long distances are constraining supply chains. If we can
shorten the distance to market through reshoring, we can alleviate supply chain pressure.

Neighborhood 91 is a complete manufacturing and transportation ecosystem focused on additive manufacturing.
Build out will enable more domestic manufacturing, bringing products closer to U.S. businesses and consumers.
Neighborhood 91 can serve as a model here in southwestern Pennsylvania, and across the country, as we seek to
make more products domestically.

As our region builds its manufacturing capability, we need the road and bridge infrastructure to support the
movement of products. The Laurel Valley Transportation Improvement Project between the Arnold Palmer Airport
and Route 819 near Mount Pleasant, Westmoreland County, exemplifies how we can make our region's highway
system more accessible to all types of vehicles while improving safety and mobility.

It will connect manufacturing firms and business parks, from our rural areas to our urban cores, and other
multimodal transportation hubs. The project will make our companies more competitive by opening new markets to
their products.

These are just a few of several ready-to-go projects our region has come together to support with a unified voice.
The projects can solve some of the short- and long-term supply chain issues confounding the federal government.
Moreover, these projects will create jobs, fuel economic growth and provide opportunity for residents across our
region regardless of ZIP code.

We are happy to again welcome Mr. Biden to our region, and we are eager to partner with his administration to
address the supply chain crisis with the right investments.

Projects like Hazelwood Green, Neighborhood 91, the Laurel Valley Transportation Improvement Project and others
can help to solve some of our country's most pressing challenges by taking advantage of this region's leadership in
innovation, logistics and manufacturing.

We encourage the federal government to invest in these unique solutions because they are not just good for
Pittsburgh: They are good for America.

Matt Smith is the president of the Greater Pittsburgh Chamber of Commerce, an affiliate of the Allegheny
Conference on Community Development.



Graphic

                                                                                         Page 3 of 3
                    PITTSBURGH REGION READY FOR SUPPLY CHAIN INVESTMENT



PHOTO: Andrew Rush/Post-Gazette: A 133,000-square-foot solar array can be seen on the top of Hazelwood
Green's Mill 19.


Load-Date: January 28, 2022


  
