

                                                                                                Page 1 of 2
    Groupon co-founder Lefkofsky's Tempus raises more funding The precision medicine company said it raised
                              $275M in a combination of equity and debt financing




Groupon co-founder Lefkofsky's Tempus raises more funding; The precision
medicine company said it raised $275M in a combination of equity and debt
                                financing
                                                    Crain's Chicago Business
                                                         October 31, 2022
                                                           Print Version



Copyright 2022 Crain Communication All Rights Reserved




Section: Pg. 20; Vol. 45
Length: 537 words
Byline: Katherine Davis

Body


Chicago biotech company Tempus has raised more funding from investors, a move it says will help it expand its
precision medicine technology platform.

Tempus, launched by Groupon co-founder Eric Lefkofsky, raised about $275 million in a combination of equity and
debt financing, the company said in a statement. Tempus said it sold shares to its existing investors for the same
price per share as its previous fundraising round at the end of 2020, when it raised $200 million at an $8.1 billion
valuation.

Tempus investors from other funding rounds include Baillie Gifford, Franklin Templeton, Google, venture-capital
fund NEA and Novo Holdings.

The debt financing came from Ares Management, a Los Angeles-based private-equity firm that's also put funds into
local health care companies like TAG-The Aspen Group and physician group Duly Health & Care. Altogether, the
new financing brings Tempus' total funding to more than $1.3 billion.

DATA LIBRARY

Tempus, which has 1,700 employees, about 900 of whom are in Chicago, says it will use the new funds to scale
operations and build out new capabilities for its platform. The company, founded in 2015, started out by providing
genomic-sequencing services to treat different cancers. Since then, it has expanded to treat other conditions, like
cardiology, diabetes and infectious diseases such as COVID-19. Now the company says it owns one of the world's

                                                                                               Page 2 of 2
   Groupon co-founder Lefkofsky's Tempus raises more funding The precision medicine company said it raised
                             $275M in a combination of equity and debt financing

largest libraries of clinical and molecular data. Using this information, Tempus says it can provide "contextualized"
results for each specific patient, insights that help physicians tailor and personalize treatment plans.

"In the last seven years, we've made great strides in developing and deploying smarter diagnostics not only in
oncology, but neuropsychiatry, infectious disease, and cardiology," Lefkofsky said in a statement. "We are
committed to achieving our mission in applying AI to health care broadly with a focus on deploying solutions at
scale that have real impact on patient care today and research in the future."

Last fall, it was reported that Tempus was exploring going public as soon as the first half of 2022. But that was
before a turbulent public market this year resulted in one of the weakest IPO markets in years. Earlier this year,
Tempus acquired San Francisco-based Highline Sciences, a full-service clinical contract research organization that
manages and executes early- and late-stage clinical trials.

Tempus' fundraise comes near the end of a slow venture-capital market this year, according to data from PitchBook
and the National Venture Capital Association. About $43 billion was invested in U.S. companies in the third quarter,
a nine-quarter low. Like Tempus, many of the companies still raising funding are going back to existing investors for
cash.

Despite the slowdown in VC, health care companies in Illinois and across the country are attracting capital at a
higher rate than some of their peers in other industries. Of the 10 largest VC deals in Illinois during the third quarter,
seven were with health care companies that spanned across pharmaceutical, medical device and health care
services subsectors, PitchBook and NVCA data shows. A similar trend is taking place across the country.


Load-Date: November 3, 2022


  
