

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 2
                            TOO MUCH HEALTH TECH AI MAY BE BAD FOR YOUR HEALTH




           TOO MUCH HEALTH TECH AI MAY BE BAD FOR YOUR HEALTH
                                              Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
                                               May 21, 2022 Saturday
                                                 SOONER EDITION



Copyright 2022 P.G. Publishing Co.

Section: OPINION; Pg. WB-3
Length: 857 words

Body


Without much fanfare, some of the biggest names in tech have been pulling back on once-enthusiastic efforts to
disrupt healthcare. Within the past nine months, Alphabet Inc. has dismantled its healthcare division Google Health
while IBM sold its Watson Health data and analytics business to a private equity firm, having struggled to turn a
profit. It turns out healthcare is a highly complex industry and much of the hype around the transformative promise
of artificial intelligence may have been overblown.

That reality has hit hard in the U.K, whose influx of investment into health tech comes thanks to the internationally
respected, centralized National Health Service that has tested new technology through a special department called
NHSX.

Health tech refers to a market in which companies use technology to solve healthcare problems. These range from
chatbots to help patients triage symptoms of an illness to fitness trackers to monitor a patient's vital signs with a
fitness tracker to machine-learning algorithms to make hospital waiting rooms more efficient. A growing cohort of
mental health apps for consumers offers to help people manage stress or sleep better.

Many of these systems say they use artificial intelligence, which can give them a funding boost in private markets. It
has in England. Funding for health-tech startups has soared in the U.K. from $420 million in 2016 to approximately
$3.8 billion in 2021 according to data from database management firm Dealroom and London promotional agency
London&Partners. That put Britain in third place behind the U.S. and China for health-tech investment last year.

But some of the country's more mature health-tech firms, which got into this game early, are going through
something of a midlife crisis, exacerbated by the wider loss of momentum in the pandemic health-tech boom in the
U.S.

Part of the problem, according to staff and entrepreneurs from multiple health-tech firms, has been a clash of
cultures between the ambitious and iterative world of engineering - where problems can be solved with the right
algorithm - and the world of medicine, which calls for a more cautious approach. Medical researchers at health-tech
firms have complained of being steamrolled by the move-fast-and-break-things approach of highly paid software
engineers. The techies, for their part, complain of being unable to experiment freely in a world obsessed with
patient safety and regulation.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 2
                        TOO MUCH HEALTH TECH AI MAY BE BAD FOR YOUR HEALTH

The resulting stumbles from this culture clash not only hurts company profits, it also threatens to corrode patient
trust in the National Health System and other healthcare systems.

Among the more affected British players is Sensyne Health Plc, which uses artificial intelligence to analyze patient
records to help pharmaceutical companies develop new medicines. To get that data, Sensyne has signed
agreements with a handful of NHS trusts, such as Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children and Exeter NHS
Trust; together they own a 16.2% stake in the firm in return for sharing patient data the company says is
anonymized.

But Sensyne found itself on the brink of collapse last month, after the company said it was on the verge of running
out of cash and cutting the majority of its staff, according to Sky News. The company had been fined £400,000
($495,000) by the London Stock Exchange in November for failing to disclose bonus payments to its chief executive
officer, a former British science minister who stepped down last month.

Publicly, the company said it suffered contract delays because of the COVID-19 pandemic. But its shift away from
developing algorithms to selling access to an analytics platform, as described on its website, also speaks to the
challenge of applying cutting edge AI to complex challenges in medicine.

Another high flying health-tech startup, Babylon Health, has seen its shares fall by nearly 87% since it went public
last October through a blank-check company merger that valued it at $4.2 billion. It's now worth about $528 million.
The company has heavily marketed its use of artificial intelligence to give diagnostic advice to patients through a
symptom-checker on its app, but doctors have warned it has given unsafe information through the checker.
Babylon, in response, publicly criticized an oncologist who criticized its symptom checker as a "troll" who "tweeted
defamatory content about us."

Signs are pointing to artificial intelligence falling short of its promise more generally in medicine. Multiple clinical
studies published last year showed nearly all artificial intelligence tools used to try and predict a diagnosis of
COVID-19 made no real difference or were potentially harmful. A separate study published in the British Medical
Journal last year also found 94% of AI systems that scanned for signs of breast cancer were less accurate than the
analysis of a single radiologist.

"This is not an AI problem," said Booth. "It's technology coming into healthcare thinking it can outperform expert
human beings at treating other human beings."

It seems when technology fails in that regard, humans pay the price.

Parmy Olson is a Bloomberg Opinion columnist.



Graphic


PHOTO: Courtesy of UPMC: UPMC is using new technology designed to help patients get faster stroke treatment.
When a patient has stroke symptoms and gets an MRI or CT scan, the Viz.ai app uses artificial intelligence to
determine if the patient is having a stroke.


Load-Date: May 21, 2022


  
