

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 2
                                 AI'S POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE DOMINATES EVENT




                  AI'S POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE DOMINATES EVENT
                                        Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
                                                  August 23, 2023 Wednesday
                                                              ALL EDITION



Copyright 2023 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: LOCAL; Pg. A7
Length: 494 words

Byline: KIMBERLY WETHAL , kwethal@madison.com

Body


ChatGPT-style software could order medication mid-doctor's visit just by listening in, and your genetics could
predict the best medication for you, Epic Systems Corp. says as it continues to focus on automating health care
processes and alleviating clinician workloads.

Epic talked about these advancements as part of its annual User Group Meeting that brings about 14,000 people
from hundreds of Epic customer organizations to its sprawling Verona campus. The three-day convergence of
health care administrators and staff gives Epic's customers insight into new features in development and offers
breakout sessions centered on the health care industry's largest hurdles.

This year, the topic of generative AI and its ability to automate some of health care's most time-consuming tasks
was king. Epic founder and CEO Judith Faulkner hinted at a few upcoming features during her executive address
Tuesday morning in a nearly full Deep Space auditorium.

The conference's theme, Castaway - which also happens to be the moniker of Epic's newest office building within
its "Storybook" cluster of buildings on campus - represents where the health care industry is now, Faulkner said.
After surviving the shipwreck and being flung out to sea - a thinly veiled metaphor for how the COVID-19 pandemic
upended the health care industry - the industry has washed ashore and must find a way to move forward.

"It's been tumultuous: Things have washed away, health care staff have left, hospitals have closed. And important
services, such as maternity, have closed," she told health care workers. "The storm was grueling ... not everyone
has made it. We're still having to throw life buoys to those in jeopardy. But we're going to make our new health care
world better than it was before."

Through a partnership with Microsoft, Epic launched its own generative AI technology earlier this year, four months
after the debut of ChatGPT. With it, Epic hopes to add AI to some of its most recognizable platforms, including
MyChart and the patient management app Rover, to reduce administrative tasks for clinicians and allow patients to
schedule appointments with just a few text messages from a chatbot.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 2
                             AI'S POTENTIAL IN HEALTH CARE DOMINATES EVENT

And while machine-based learning isn't new to Epic - there are already nearly 2,200 functions within its software -
the company hopes it'll decrease worker burnout and decrease administrative costs.

Epic's enterprises also will focus on improving health care outcomes through its Cosmos platform, which allows for
210 million de-identified electronic health records to serve as a database for human health.

At the doctor's office level, expanded genomic testing could mean your doctor picks a certain medication based on
what's in your DNA.

"When you're prescribing a med for a patient whose genetic test results are available, we might be able to tell you if
the medication will work for the patient, or what would the best dose be based on the patient's genetic information,"
Faulkner said.


Load-Date: August 23, 2023


  
