 care startup Fabric raised $60 million in a series A funding round Feb. 21 to expand its AI software, which aims to automate clinical and administrative health care tasks.
The Chelsea-based firm, founded in 2021, plans to use the funding to grow its tech platform, which provides services to patients at several points of the care continuum from start of symptoms to an emergency room visit. The funding round was led by General Catalyst, with participants including Thrive Capital, Google Ventures, Salesforce Ventures, Vast Ventures, Atento Capital and Box Group.
Fabric's virtual care platform includes an AI-powered chatbot that can intake patient symptoms and connect them to a telehealth provider directly on the platform. It also offers in-person administrative assistance in emergency rooms and other health care settings, aiming to reduce the time clinicians spend on paperwork. The company provides digital intake and discharge forms that patients can access directly from their phone, allowing them to input clinical information, control prescription fulfillment and even self-discharge when appropriate.
Aniq Rahman, founder and CEO of Fabric, said that the firm's approach is an attempt to integrate different health care technologies that have "historically been fragmented point solutions."
Fabric, which was formerly named Florence, launched from stealth last March with $20 million in seed funding. Since then it has changed its name and acquired the telehealth company Zipnosis and conversational AI firm GYANT to build out its digital platform.
Reduced provider workload
Fabric works with 70 health systems including Luminis Health, Intermountain Health, OSF Healthcare and the Cleveland Clinic, Rahman said. Its telemedicine platform has seen 5 million visits and 13 million chatbot conversations to date.
The average patient wait time for a virtual visit is seven minutes, the company said. Virtual intakes have reduced provider workload to 89 seconds - as much as 10 times faster than the typical telehealth or in-person appointment, Rahman said.
Rahman added that the new funding will continue to boost the company's growth. Fabric plans to continue investing in technology, planning acquisitions of other tech companies and growing its workforce. The company currently employs 130 workers, but Rahman said it's possible that the company could double its headcount in the next year.
"I think there's an opportunity for us to touch every patient in the country," Rahman said, noting that he hopes to grow the usage of the company's conversational AI chatbot and telehealth platform.


