
Shortly after she joined MetroHealth in December 2022, Steed embarked on a listening and engagement tour across the health system. It quickly became clear that continued listening would be a key piece of Steed's strategy for guiding the system.
"What jumped out very loud and clear is an overwhelming need for this," she said. "Not to just be a tour where it's a one and done, but there was an overwhelming need for the organization to be heard, to be understood, to have a legitimate seat at the table, to be activated, to find their voice, to be really listened to in a powerful way."
Out of that process came several strategic priorities: developing a people-first culture, elevating MetroHealth's clinical and academic profile, creating a replicable model for eradicating health care disparities and continuing to reinvent and reimagine the health system as it came out of the pandemic.
It also helped shape Steed's approach to repairing trust in MetroHealth. In 2022, the health system's board of trustees fired then-president and CEO Dr. Akram Boutros, citing a report that found he awarded himself $1.9 million in unauthorized bonuses between 2018 and 2022. Boutros, who has denied the allegations, voluntarily dismissed his lawsuit against MetroHealth in December, citing health issues.
"I think that that intentional listening, that intentional engagement and that intentional focus on creating a people-first culture really sprouted from the trauma and the tragedy," Steed said. "By taking that listening ear and really understanding the needs of the organization and really identifying out the gates that one single individual doesn't make a culture, I think we came on the other side of it a much stronger."
Rebuilding that sense of trust included appointing MetroHealth's first-ever chief people officer to oversee the system's People and Human Resources Division. With that position came process and structure changes that resulted in more clearly defined roles and responsibilities and helped to establish better and tighter controls across the organization, Steed said.
In a recent interview with Crain's, Steed discussed her goals for MetroHealth, workforce challenges in the health care landscape, the rise of artificial intelligence and the importance of collaboration to eliminate health disparities in Cleveland.
Note: The interview has been edited for length and clarity.
You've talked about your goal for MetroHealth to be a national model for how health systems can end disparities in health care. What are some ways the system is doing this?
One is having the first and only high school in a hospital across the United States. This allows us an opportunity to really be innovative in terms of addressing the workforce challenges. But also, I see this as a vessel for really being that national model on health equity because we are able to draw from the direct community at-large and start to plant the seeds early with our young, with our youth population, to start to translate that into 'How do we graduate our students, a hundred percent of our students into professions that impact the lives of those that we serve?'
Several of our graduates actually graduate into disciplines where they can be community health workers or liaisons in the community. They can start to connect those dots, connect the community with meaningful resources and access points, address proactively and strategically as well as innovatively those social drivers of health. We're twisting this from an innovative type of way of saying, 'Let's take the high school population and help to tool them up.' By the time they graduate, they're already graduating into professions that make a meaningful difference in the lives of those that we serve.
We recently announced, announced a very creative and innovative partnership with Cuyahoga County Community College. We launched our Health Equity Centers of Excellence that is embedded into every single clinical department and every single service within our organization. We're partnering hand in glove with Tri-C to be able to educate our providers and educate our frontline caregivers on what it means to be community-centered.
Within MetroHealth, we have this institute called Institute for H.O.P.E., which stands for Health Opportunities Partnership, Empowerment and Equity. This is a multifaceted approach to how we're being proactive and taking data and an analytical-driven approach. It also takes a very strategic approach to evaluate all of those social barriers and social drivers to good health, whether it be housing insecurity, food insecurity, transportation barriers, economic barriers, having to make a choice between paying your utility bill and actually attaining great medical care.
We're actually combating directly all of those social barriers and eliminating those barriers by screening our community. Taking a blanket type of approach and casting that wide net into the community to really identify what those pitfalls and barriers are. And then through technology and through innovation, we're making an immediate connection to resources in our community or through programs that we've built up in internally within MetroHealth or in partnership with our various community partners.
Workforce is a huge challenge right now in health care. How has MetroHealth been faring?
We're not immune by any stretch of the imagination to the workforce challenges. I'm a fourth-generation nurse, who's been trained in bedside delivery of care. In all of my years of practicing nursing, I've never seen a workforce shortage as significant as what we had to endure. Quite honestly, there has been a rapid and mass exodus of individuals leaving our profession at leaps and bounds.
How we've taken a couple steps back to address this is in many ways. We strongly are confident in our model, which is very innovative, with Lincoln West High School, where we can train up the next generation and serve as that gateway, being able to upskill and being able to attain that next level of education so they can start to plug holes quicker. Then by offering internships, by offering scholarships. (Students) are always going to be loyal and always going to have a connection point back to MetroHealth. We have a high proportion of our graduates that graduate as CNAs, so they can actually work on our floors and graduate into careers where they're community liaisons and community health workers.
We are casting a wide net with the colleges. We're incentivizing our preceptors, our clinical educators, so we can take on more learners, so we can actually increase the capacity of those that are graduating in, so we can be able to set the stage to address that sooner and much more strategically.
There's also technology. We pride ourselves on really coming up with very innovative care delivery models that otherwise would not have been in existence. We're adopting this in a variety of settings and atmospheres, including a virtual nurse platform. We're leveraging virtual nursing to be able to mitigate and reduce the workload of our in-person, frontline nurses, which is absolutely helping us to resolve for that challenge in a much more prudent but much more innovative way.
Our partners on the hill and our partners at the state and overall advocacy level have been plentiful. There certainly has been an undivided attention amongst policymakers and the various advocates out there to really roll their sleeves up right along with us because we know we're not alone in really addressing this issue. There are so many clinical opportunities, especially with the policy advocates out there and legislators, around being able to open up and widen the front doors of possibilities on working with international recruitment in a much more expedited way. That is another opportunity we're certainly putting on our forefront.
You joined MetroHealth during a challenging time. What kinds of changes have the system implemented over the last year to rebuild trust within the system and the community?
Obviously, I came in during a very, very difficult time. I think even using the label "difficult," I think that's an understatement. But with the level of difficulty also came so much reward. We've been able to navigate through a tremendous storm and come out the other side extremely resilient as an organization.
I can honestly say our performance has never been so significant to a level where we've showed up as an organization. We've been able to really build up the fractured trust both internally to the organization as well as externally. I think we came on the other side of it a much stronger.
I would also say from a process (standpoint) and just the way we were designed as an organization, I made many, many changes there that actually helped to establish much better and tighter controls across the organization. One very clear role that sprouted out of my first year was a newly appointed chief people and administrative officer, otherwise known as a chief human resources officer role. I would say this role was rather critical and, in its absence, resulted in a lot of fall downs, that otherwise other organizations would've have been on top of, and a lot of organizational controls and practices we should have had in place.
Everything is pretty much in the black and white. You see what you see, and nothing is hidden, so we're not leaving anything to chance from that point of view. With any new chief executive officer comes change, and I can honestly say over the last year, I've completely made a lot of necessary adjustments with my leadership team. It wasn't a matter of throwing the baby out with the bath water. (It) was more so new future, new leader, new direction.
The new leaders that came on board are walking into the history that once was before us. To me, that's just a refreshing, long overdue change. But with that being said, I can really highlight that the level of confidence and the vote of confidence in the community, and, in particular, our county supports have had a historical increase from 2016 to 2017, where we had the last increase. The county really wrapped its arms around us, given the fact that we proved ourselves as really building up and picking up the bad reputation that we had with that cloud that was before us. They gave us a strong vote of confidence that what we're doing is serving the needs of the people of Cuyahoga County and beyond.
There's a lot of buzz around artificial intelligence. What role do you see AI having in health care?
I love the fact that AI is the new buzz. It used to be telemedicine. Now, it's AI. I'm a bit of a traditionalist, being a nurse by training. I think there is no replacement for the human connection, but I certainly believe there is a place for AI in our future that is going to make health care delivery much more efficient.
If you really think about the frame of a day, and then if you can evaluate all of the value-added tasks that you're doing on a day-in, day-out basis, and then compare to all of the non-value added, that really doesn't make your make your day much more productive, but you have to do it. I think that AI has a place in taking off those non-value added activities and being able to really amplify your ability to make those human connections a lot more efficient and smarter.
At the same time, I think there's going to be tremendous financial value in AI, support and resources. I'm one of those that I'm going to jump on the bandwagon of being an early adopter. I'm going to be a change innovator. and I'll be the Guinea pig for really testing out what the technology is going to help us do in a safe and very smart way.
In December, MetroHealth, Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals came together to announce plans for addressing food insecurity in Greater Cleveland. How important is collaboration to addressing health disparities in the community?
It is not just important-it's essential. We are not going to be able to address health disparities without collaboration and partnership. Less than 20% of what we do around health equity occurs within the four walls of any one particular hospital organization. Greater than 80% of our impact of what we're doing and what we need to do occurs outside in the communities at large. With that being said, this is no longer a hospital problem. This is no longer a hospital opportunity. This is truly a collaboration opportunity, and this is a community health opportunity.
I'm so proud of the partnerships forged, and I'm very proud to work shoulder-to-shoulder, arm-in-arm with University Hospitals, with the Cleveland Clinic and everyone in between on really going after this. I can honestly say I have not heard anyone contest or resist health equity.
When you put the person in the center, which is why I'm pushing for a person-centered culture, no one can contest that. And if we step outside of ourselves and truly treat the entire community as a collective patient, we all serve that collective patient. If we go in with that mindset, and I know in just talking with my peers we do, this is a first for this community, seeing this united front among the three organizations that are in the community. We truly have committed ourselves to collaboration.
Looking back on your first year as president and CEO, what are you most proud of?
Our performance is strong in every single metric, from financial to clinical, to quality, to experience of care, to growth. We've moved from being a $1.6 billion net revenue organization to a $2 billion, which means in my first year, through all of the headwinds that I'm talking about, and through the storm of, of really coming on the heels of a scandal, we've been able to elevate and raise our organization up $400 million in just one year's time.
I'm also proud of the engagement and the commitment and just the trust that we've been able to reforge in the community. We truly are the community's organization. We truly are the people's organization. I'm so proud of that accomplishment. It's a big deal when you come in and trust is fractured, and that's what it felt like. And that's what it was. In December of 2022, there was a heightened level of distrust. There was a heightened level of the people being let down. And I can honestly tell you fast forward to present, they are fully engaged, they're fully on board, they're fully rolling their sleeves up right along with us. In just a year's time, we've been able to completely rebound and demonstrate a heightened level of resilience through it all.
We had a lot of historical firsts that have never occurred in this community whatsoever in 2023. We welcomed over 5,000 men, women (and) children for our historic health expos. Nothing of this magnitude has ever been done in the Northeast Ohio, Cleveland and Greater Cleveland communities. Through the launch of our men, women and children's health expos and empowerment fairs, we brought everyone out and offered free screenings, free education, free access to treatment. I can tell you we saved lives through the combination of all of the efforts we delivered on. We are truly making our mark on eradicating health care disparities and zeroing out the death gap.
I stand very proud of on being the first of many, being the first female (CEO of MetroHealth). That was a historic moment and accomplishment, being the first woman of color or first person of color, female or not. And then being the first nurse to lead this very esteemed, formidable organization in almost 200 years.
Looking ahead, what are you most excited about as it relates to the health system?
A continuation of the momentum that we've been able to deliver this year. We're very growth-focused by expanding access across our communities and beyond, by embracing innovation and new forms of business, and certainly being on the forefront, the cutting edge of technology and artificial intelligence. I don't want us to be on the back end of that. I want us to be on the forefront of that and being a national model for that.
Most certainly, I want to continue our momentum. We have a lot of momentum, and we're going strong on our level of how we're impacting and engaging the community. Lifting up the historically disinvested communities and lift both the health and the wealth of those communities. Having a collaborative and partnership-based mindset in mind.
Not only are we looking to continue to expand our footprint on our main campus through that $1 billion investment, but we're looking across all of our various communities at large and starting to do some mixed-use development. Not only having a healthcare lens and focus, but how do we invest in housing? How do we invest in food distribution? How do we invest in having satellites for educational access and digital access? Mixed-use development investment in various underinvested communities is certainly top of mind. And then continuing to advance our groundbreaking academic and research advancement.


