
Intelligent systems combine artificial intelligence (AI) and automation to perform tasks more efficiently, learning from data and reason and making decisions, either autonomously or with human guidance. For example, using data analytics, machine learning and computer vision, intelligent systems determine customer preferences and create highly customized products.
In manufacturing, intelligent systems reduce cost and risk by automating repetitive tasks or tasks that require immense precision. They can also reduce downtime and improve maintenance operations by continually monitoring equipment for patterns and anomalies that indicate potential issues.
Companies like Proctor & Gamble have announced they are using Microsoft Azure as a foundation to digitize and integrate data from more than 100 manufacturing sites, globally, enabling the giant to enhance AI, machine learning, and edge computing services for real-time visibility. This will enable P&G employees to analyze production data while leveraging AI to support decisions that drive improvement and exponential impact.
The digital transformation of P&Gs manufacturing platform will let the company check product quality in real time, avoid waste, and optimize the use of energy and water in manufacturing plants.
Separately, the performance automotive company BMW is using cobots or collaborative robots that work side-by-side with humans to enhance its manufacturing processes. According to BMW, collaborative robots are helping to equip the insides of BMW X3-model doors with sound and moisture insulation. Foil with an adhesive bead is put in place and slightly pressed on by assembly line workers and then roller heads on robot arms handle the labor-intensive task of the final fixing process that seals the foil, protecting the electronics in the door against moisture.
Within other sectors, like health care, AI-enabled image reconstruction lets radiologists reduce radiation doses while improving image quality in CT scans. AI can also improve diagnostic accuracy and speed by detecting areas of interest that manual inspections may miss.
The ability of intelligent systems to rapidly analyze large amounts of data from hundreds of sources, from customer input to the Internet of Things (IoT), can enhance decision-making, deliver better products and services, promote collaboration, and elevate Cyber Security initiatives.
But intelligent systems depend on large amounts of data, so data quality,privacy, and safety are areas of concern. For example, organizations must protect personally identifiable information like Social Security numbers and other sensitive data from unauthorized access or misuse.
To address these and other challenges, business leaders should assess their data readiness and quality, establishing robust information governanceto ensure clean, consistent, and relevant data while improving their data collection and management processes. And because successful implementation depends on skills, in addition to tools, companies may wish to invest in talent development and education that goes beyond technical training to also address the ethical and social aspects of AI-powered systems.
AI-enhanced Cyber Solutions can assist in threat mitigation by identifying shadow data (information that exists outside of parameters set by the organization, such as data that was copied from a production environment to train an AI model in the cloud and then left there, unprotected, or HR data that was shared between managers in a Slack channel). They can also monitor for data access abnormalities, and alert appropriate Cyber Security professionals about potential threats, helping to detect and remediate issues in real-time. As part of a comprehensive Cyber Security initiative, AI-powered risk analysis can produce incident summaries and alerts while automating incident responses, identifying vulnerabilities, and reinforcing alert investigations and Cyber Triage.
As nation-states and other bad actors step up their efforts, AI Cyber Security models can help to balance threat mitigation and user experience with such actions as analyzing the risk of each login attempt and verifying users through behavioral data, simplifying access for verified users and reducing the cost of fraud while helping to prevent phishing, malware, and other malicious activities. Forward-looking businesses and other organizations are leveraging AI to increase their efficiency and service delivery and are also partnering with Cyber Security professionals to keep their operations safe while protecting sensitive data.

Carl Mazzanti is president of eMazzanti Technologiesin Hoboken, NJ, providing IT consulting services for businesses ranging from home offices to multinational corporations.
Copyright © 2024 BridgeTower Media. All Rights Reserved.


