
Perhaps there's a better way of making voting decisions on critical policy issues than basing them on campaign one-liners. Enter deliberative democracy.
Deliberative Polling â " the process of bringing together people of diverse backgrounds and opinions for a moderated discussion of the most pressing issues facing us â " has been developed and refined by professors James Fishkin and Larry Diamond. This process "has been used over 150 times in 50 countries," according to Standford's Deliberative Democracy Lab's website.
I first wrote about deliberative democracy in a 2019 column that described America in One Room, a project that brought together 500 people from across the political spectrum for a moderated weekend retreat. By listening to expert, fact-based evidence and applying Deliberative Polling, they were able to substantially reconcile their differences on a number of issues.
Most recently, "America in One Room: the Youth Vote," a collaboration between Close Up Foundation, Stanford University, the Generation Lab, Helena, and University of Southern California, gathered 430 young, first-time voters in Washington, D.C., on July 19-22, 2024. The participants comprised a variety of ages from both blue states and red states, and from rural, suburban, and urban America â " a group that also included all political persuasions. They attended sessions to deliberate on four key issues: energy and the environment; the economy, AI, and taxes; health care; and democracy and elections. Most important, the sessions were moderated by experts with differing views on each topic, not by politicians or media personalities.
The results were measurable and significant. Participants were able to reach a closer consensus on a number of issues on which they were widely divergent before the event. On the contentious question of allowing partisan observers to challenge the eligibility of voters as they cast their ballots, "Overall opposition to this proposal increased 19 points, from 58% [before the event] to 77% [afterward]. Republicans increased their opposition by 17 points, from 54% to 71%. Democrats increased their opposition by 20 points from 65% to 85%," according to the executive summary.
The consensus was not unanimous and there were some surprising results. Despite two-thirds agreeing that the U.S. should achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, 59% voted that we should not eliminate the sale of gas and diesel vehicles.
Yet the summary noted that the participants, "also increased their mutual respect for each other across their most contentious divisions - granting that those with whom they most strongly disagree have good reasons for their views ... They became more deliberative voters."
Can deliberative democracy be used more broadly? One way is to incorporate the process into civics curricula in schools. "It's actually a more effective form of civic education we believe than conventional civic education because anything very active is better than something passive," according to Fishkin.
Fishkin believes that deliberative democracy can help depolarize America. "Left to our own devices, most people either don't pay much attention or if they do, they tune into their favorite news sources or their social media feeds and they only hear one side of the argument that is most congenial to them. That's part of what's been driving us apart," he said.
You and I can play a part also. Short of organizing an America in One Room event, we can mimic the process by reading and listening to experts on critical issues. We admire articulate speakers who are able to express new ideas in a clear way. We can also become "articulate listeners," able to understand new ideas conveyed by experts rather than politicians or media celebrities who have inherent conflicts of interest.
We constantly hear how polarized we are in America. The question becomes whether that is a necessary reality or a self-fulfilling prophecy perpetuated by endlessly repeating the same pessimistic thought. Tribalism is nothing new. It's part of human nature. Yet there are deliberate actions we can take to prevent our clannish behavior from consuming us. We can become deliberative voters.
Deliberative democracy applied to legislative bodies and citizens across the political divide can put us back on the road to representative democracy - despite all the chaos and distractions coming from the back seat.
Frydenlund, a columnist who lives in Prairie du Chien, Wis., writes about nature, politics and social issues from a systems perspective. He can be contacted via email at: epfrydenlund@gmail.com


