
In offering an explanation for measles, which was considered eliminated a quarter-century ago, The Columbian ("Misinformation to blame for measles comeback," In Our View, March 7) wrote: "The situation reflects absurdly willful ignorance from large segments of the population."
Unfortunately, absurdly willful ignorance is a hallmark of America's Republican voters. Millions of these voters:
n Continue to believe that the 2020 election was stolen from their man despite a plethora of evidence that it was not and none that it was;
n View Jan. 6, 2021, as a reasonable exercise of their dissatisfaction with the outcome of the 2020 election as do many of their congressional representatives (who probably don't believe that but realize that they couldn't hold office without their support). This, after most of them watched the insurrection on live television (like their designated hero);
n Will actually support their main guy in November even if he's convicted of all 91 charges against him.
Norm Krasne
VANCOUVER
Explore benefits of AI
I was pleased to see a productive - and civilized - discussion about the benefits and challenges posed by artificial intelligence ("It's just complicated math: Columbian's Economic Forecast event zooms in on AI," The Columbian, March 5). Another aspect of AI that should be considered when discussing the technology's role in our local economy is how the technology is already shaping the future of other top industries in the region.
Take health care, for example, which was cited by economist Scott Bailey as one of the top drivers of job growth in Clark County. AI is being deployed across numerous applications to improve health care delivery across the U.S., and it holds exciting potential for reducing health disparities in Washington's underserved communities.
AI's health care applications should be at the forefront of policymakers' minds as they look to develop rules of the road for this emerging technology. With Attorney General Bob Ferguson and members of the Legislature working to establish a new AI Task Force, it is critical that our elected leaders take a measured approach to AI regulation that addresses legitimate issues while not derailing the benefits this technology offers Washington residents.
Susannah Hardesty
VANCOUVER
Support carbon dividend plan
It can be disheartening to see an environmental policy fail. Luckily, failure is often just an opportunity for improvement. That's the message I took away from a recent article ("California's war on plastic bag use seems to have backfired. Lawmakers are trying again," Los Angeles Times, Feb. 18).
Similarly, we can look to other countries to learn about their climate change solutions. Putting a price on carbon - a carbon fee and dividend - is successful in countries like Canada. These programs collect fees from companies as they extract and release carbon emissions, and the money is cycled back to citizens in checks similar to economic stimulus checks.
Putting a price on carbon is a proven win-win that the U.S. needs to get in the game on. I encourage our Sens. Maria Cantwell and Patty Murray, and Oregon Sens. Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley, to support a carbon fee and dividend for a livable future.
Jessica Lang
PORTLAND
Pending loss of Vanco golf is sad
The city of Vancouver has decided to build apartments in the place of Vanco driving range ("After more than 50 years, Vanco Golf Range to close in October," The Columbian, March 8). It's clear someone made this decision from their desk in some office away from this site.
The city would never build on one of their many parks would they? Some of these parks I assume don't get as many visitors per day as Vanco. I started going to Vanco about two years ago. This is my and many other people's city park. I've met many amazing people at this establishment. It has a feel of community and friendship.
On only the third visit, the owner and I were on a first-name basis as well as some of the employees. You are taking away all these employees' and owner's livelihood. You're taking away something that has been there for decades and decades. A place where people go to make their day better and hopefully their golf game better as well.
I get that Vancouver needs more housing. I don't get the location that you have chosen. It's been around longer than most city of Vancouver employees. It's very sad.
Brandon Schouviller
VANCOUVER
A win-win for can scavengers
For years, I have seen people going through recycling containers in my Vancouver neighborhood to get out the aluminum cans ("Can collectors' rummaging rankles Clark County residents," The Columbian, Feb. 21). I admire them for working that hard to get 10 cents per can, and I doubt they would do so if they had a better source of income.
Several months ago, I started putting my cans into a separate container and setting it out along with the recycling bins the night before the truck comes. Someone picks up the cans and doesn't have to go through the Waste Connections recycling container with the cardboard and metal to look for them. The cans are mine and I can choose to recycle them myself or give them to someone else to do so.
This is one simple way to cope with the problem of people going through official recycling containers and irritating homeowners.
Tom Paulu
VANCOUVER
Legislator makes a difference
Thank you Sen. Lynda Wilson for your tireless work on three important issues: Domestic violence against women, hospital patient rights and most recently your leadership on a bill that passed regarding police pursuits. You show that legislators can have an impact ("Washington state Sen. Lynda Wilson to step down from Legislature to spend time with family," The Columbian, March 6).
Greg Flakus
VANCOUVER


