Health, New York-based Aegis Ventures has announced a new initiative, the Digital Consortium.
In this effort, nine health systems, including Northwell, are serving as its founding members. The health systems will collaborate with Aegis, which partners with industry leaders and entrepreneurs to create, launch, and scale transformative companies. Specifically through the Digital Consortium, the health systems will work with Aegis with the aim to codevelop and deploy health-tech applications that address pressing needs, generating diversified revenue sources.
Dr. John Noseworthy, emeritus president and CEO of Mayo Clinic, will serve as the Digital Consortiums chairman.
In addition to Northwell, the eight other participating health systems include Endeavor Health, Indiana University Health, Memorial Hermann Health System, Novant Health, Ochsner Health, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Sharp HealthCare and Stanford Health Care. These organizations were selected through a rigorous evaluation process for their demonstrated track records of leadership and innovation in care delivery and quality, according to a news release about the new effort.
"Health systems must play a central role in designing the next generation of healthtech innovation, and I am honored to serve at the helm of this initiative," Noseworthy said in a news release.
"As we embark on this endeavor, our focus is clear to address the fundamental challenges in healthcare through a unified, innovative approach, and accelerate the translation of ideas into tangible solutions that put patients at the center and address growing burnout among healthcare workers," Noseworthy added.
For the last three years, Northwell has worked with Aegis, partnering in the building and growth of four companies, addressing such areas as patient engagement, women's health, AI-enabled diagnostics, workflow automation, and emotion analytics.
"Our collaboration with Aegis Ventures has exemplified what's possible when you combine leading clinical, technology, and business resources to advance healthcare innovation, Michael Dowling, president and CEO of Northwell Health said in the news release.
Together we've fast-tracked the creation of cost-effective, validated solutions that solve important challenges across our enterprise and can now be replicated with health systems across the country, Dowling added. The Digital Consortium harnesses health systems' collective expertise to foster groundbreaking solutions, redefining healthcare delivery for the better. 
"The partnership between Aegis Ventures and Northwell Health epitomizes the transformative impact that new technologies can have on health system patients and employees," Aegis Ventures Co-Founder and Managing Partner John Beadle said in the news release. "At a time of seismic change across the healthtech landscape, we are poised to expand this successful playbook on a larger scale, catalyzing innovation across the nation."
Copyright © 2024 BridgeTower Media. All Rights Reserved.


