
But upon receiving a request to move forward in the application process, he was alarmed by a new interviewing system. Instead of a human resources representative, he would answer questions from an artificial intelligence forum designed to record, analyze and ultimately determine his value as a job candidate.
"At first, I thought the idea of it was cool," Shah said. "As someone who did not have much interview experience, it made me feel more comfortable just talking to a camera and answering questions."
After about one or two rounds, the questions began to feel monotonous, Shah said. He began to miss the interpersonal aspect of interviews.
In Shah's case, his AI interviewer belonged to a recruitment solutions company known as Hirevue, one of the most popular human resource management companies that specializes in machine processing. Increasingly, large and small companies are using AI in various aspects of their businesses.
Although not as overt, even certain networking sites including LinkedIn or Glassdoor have incorporated AI systems into application review and profile management.
As more AI-driven companies help screen candidates, some businesses are cutting their own internal human resources and recruiter positions.
But even as these new interview practices make their way into corporate settings, not all participants or spectators favor the methods used in this new age of hiring.
Tim Cole, an associate professor of Communication and Media in DePaul's College of Communication, specializes in the studies of deceptive communication, romantic relationships, attachment and relational communication.
"When we interact with others, it sparks emotions like empathy, happiness and even love," Cole said. "Whether it's a chat with a friend or working together on a project, these interactions are what make us feel connected to the world."
Although Cole's work prioritizes a more human touch over a tech-driven approach, he finds that these days the two are often intertwined.
"Technology opens conversations by making it easier to connect ... but at the same time, it can be detrimental," Cole said. "Quick texts or posts can lack depth, and people sometimes avoid real conversations by relying too much on digital tools."
Despite offering companies a way to cut costs, AI interviews can also dissuade applicants who see it as an impersonal barrier.
Shah wonders if that means companies will miss out on unique and qualified employees, simply because they don't match the AI specifications.
After going through this processed system, Shah said the applicant may question the values of the companies.
"As an applicant, applying for a role and then instantly receiving a 'Hirevue' just elongated the application process and made me feel like more of a cog in the wheel," Shah said.
For human hiring professionals, AI interviews often go against their own training and values, even if enticing from a streamlining stance.
David Avdul, interim vice president of human resources at DePaul and a part-time faculty member in the School of Business, wrestles with this conflict as a former corporate HR professional. Before joining DePaul in 2016, he spent nearly a decade in compensation and benefits management. Now he works to balance both perspectives in the face of AI.
"We've seen in research that most job interviewers prefer unstructured interviews because they believe it will allow them to gather richer information about candidates," Avdul said. "However, AI can be extremely powerful and beneficial in helping to streamline much of the heavy lifting that goes into sourcing and finding qualified candidates."
Avdul sees the value in AI's ability to conserve time, review large sets of data and even to curb potential bias and errors brought about by human instinct. But he understands that it could also portray a cold and inhumane demeanor.
But in certain industries, such as the financial sector, Shah has realized it's simply something he must do. In the past year, he has done over six Hirevue interviews for placement across various financial brands, including EY, KPMG and JPMorgan Chase & Co.
Avdul agrees it's inevitable.
"Going forward, it will be essential for jobs to adapt their processes, toolkits and mindset with the understanding that many organizations are going to deploy AI technology for talent acquisition," Avdul said. "I think that's the reality."
Related Stories:
        
Bring a gun on the CTA? AI might know
        
Slowing down AI for the health of the planet
        
AI, democracy and disinformation: How to stay informed without being influenced by fake news
Stay informed with The DePaulia's top stories,
delivered to your inbox every Monday.
View Story Comments
0
Like This Story
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Email this Story
Print this Story
Leave a Comment
Tags:
        
AI
        
artificial intelligence
        
internships
About the Contributor
Sam Mroz, Arts & Life Editor
Sam is a sophomore pursuing a major in journalism and a minor in media and cinema studies. He enjoys watching movies (in the theater), cooking and cleaning up after his dirty roommate.
Facebook
Instagram
X
Spotify
YouTube
Email Signup
RSS Feed
Open Search Bar
Search this site
Submit Search
        
Sections News La DePaulia Arts/Life Sports
        
Sections Opinions Nation & World Focus
        
Follow X Instagram Facebook Newsletter Spotify YouTube
        
About Contact The DePaulia Staff Advertise The DePaulia Code of Ethics Get Involved
The DePaulia
Donate
Have a tip?
Facebook
Instagram
X
Spotify
YouTube
Email Signup
RSS Feed
© 2024 · FLEX Pro WordPress Theme by SNO · Log in
Comments (0)
Share your thoughts...
All
The DePaulia Picks
Reader Picks
Sort: Newest
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment * Spam Control Field.Verification Field.
Name *
Email *
Close
Close Modal Window
Close


