A new report estimates that 1.15 million people died due to superbugs in 2022, and that about 39 million people could die by 2050.
The report, which was conducted by my organization along with the World Bank, provides for the first time a clearer picture of the devastating impact that drug-resistant pathogens could have, not only on human health but also on livestock and the economy at large. The findings are deeply concerning. 
Without swift, immediate and coordinated actions, we could see a dramatic decline in global animal-source food production. In the worst-case scenario, antimicrobial resistance in livestock could jeopardize the food supply of more than 2 billion people. These losses will be felt most acutely in regions with high reliance on agriculture and animal husbandry.
For decades, antimicrobials have been indispensable in maintaining the health and well-being of livestock. Animal-source foods provide around one-third of human protein needs, and more than a billion people worldwide rely on livestock for their livelihoods. The stakes are incredibly high.
Yet the misuse of these drugs in farming  often as a shortcut for poor and inappropriate husbandry practices  has contributed to a breeding ground for drug-resistant bacteria. These resistant strains, which also come from human misuse in treating diseases, then spread through our food, close contact, as well as the environment, end up in our farms, hospitals and homes. This has culminated in a one health crisis affecting all facets of life. 
In some low- and middle-income countries, the situation is particularly dire. Many farmers depend on unregulated, often substandard antibiotics for livestock, unaware of the dangers posed by misuse and overuse. The result is a fast-growing public health crisis that crosses from farms to people.
And this crisis is far from being equitable. Low and middle-income countries, where agriculture is a lifeline for millions, will bear the brunt of the economic fallout. The cost of treating resistant infections will skyrocket, production losses will deepen, and entire regions could face severe food insecurity and poverty. 
In a world already struggling with climate change and food shortages, the potential damage is unthinkable: It has been estimated that if drug-resistant zoonotic bacteria continue to spill over into human populations, the global economic loss could reach a staggering $5.2 trillion by 2050. 
Evidence of the so-called silent pandemic of antimicrobial resistance is getting louder but remains largely ignored. Nonetheless, we know how to address antimicrobial resistance in livestock, and the solutions are practical, affordable and proven. We need political will and commitment from governments to implement them at scale  effectively, an urgent pandemic-style response. 
This week, the United Nations General Assembly hosted a high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance, an opportune moment for countries to unite around an urgent, integrated response that reduces the risk of drug resistance to people, animals and plants.
First, we must focus on prevention. Reducing disease in animals through vaccination, improved biosecurity and better farm management practices will decrease the need for antibiotics. Preventative measures like these are not just beneficial for animal health; they are also good for business. According to our research, a 30 percent reduction in global antimicrobial use in the next five years in livestock could add $120 billion to the global economy by 2050.
Second, we need to embrace innovation. Artificial intelligence is transforming how we manage livestock health. A study of AI-based early disease detection in swine farms found a 400 percent return on investment by reducing unnecessary antibiotic use and improving overall farm productivity. Such technologies could be game-changing for farmers in low-income regions with limited access to healthcare infrastructure.
But prevention and innovation will not succeed without political will and strategic investment. We must ensure that multisectoral national action plans to combat antimicrobial resistance, which 90 percent of our 183 member countries and territories have developed, are fully funded and properly implemented. 
Right now, many countries are falling short, especially in the animal health sector, where underfunding and poor regulation are still widespread.
Drug-resistant pathogens are already one of the leading causes of death worldwide. But the stakes are even higher if the global community fails to act. Like the COVID-19 pandemic, antimicrobial resistance is a challenge that needs concrete funding, global coordination and local actions to overcome it. 
The latest data gives us a glimpse of the future  we have a narrow window to change it now.
Dr. Emmanuelle Soubeyran is the director general of the World Organization for Animal Health.
For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to The Hill.


