health care policies and ideas for reform. The 2024 Stoa policy topic is:
Resolved: The United States Federal Government should substantially reform its policy on healthcare.
Though many critics think the US has a "free market" or market-based health care system, it is a heavily regulated and federally subsidized system. The Peter G. Peterson foundation notes: 
 Link to Image 
        
Government insurance programs, such as Medicare and Medicaid, made up 45 percent, or $1.9 trillion, of national healthcare spending.
        
Private insurance programs, including employer-provided health insurance as well as plans purchased through the Affordable Care Act, accounted for 30 percent, or about $1.3 trillion.
The Cato Institute's Michael F. Cannon, author of Recovery: A Guide to Reforming the U.S. Health Sector (October, 2023) (PDF here)
Cannon give an overview in this June 17, 2024 discussion at the Institute for Economic Affairs in London: The Myth of America's Free Market Healthcare | IEA Book Club
There is of course much more to say about federal health care reform, but students (and parents) shouldn't feel overwhelmed by the topic. Most health care services are local and most health care regulations and programs are local and state. State level policies and programs likely should be reformed, but the Stoa topic calls for USFG to "substantially reform its policy on healthcare."
Homeschool debate alumni now reforming federal health care policies
A number of today's health care policy experts were homeschooled debaters (and many attended FEE or Economic Thinking workshops).
        
Lawson Mansell, Niskanen Center
        
Jonathan Wolfson, Cicero Institute
        
Jonathan Williamson, ALEC
        
Maxford Nelson, Freedom Foundation
        
Andrew Trask, Deep Mind, OpenMined
1. Lawson Mansell, former NCFCA debater, now Health Policy Analyst at the Niskanen Center. Lawson worked at the Milken Institute on health care issues. I've emailed Lawson and he is interested in participating and has case ideas.
2. Jonathan Wolfson at Cicero Institute I haven't contacted Jonathan yet. Jonathan is Diana Wolfson's son. And Cicero Institute is sponsor of State Policy Network August annual meeting in Arizona.
3. Jonathan Williams, ALEC. Jonathan was homeschool debater in Michigan and attended an early FEE or Economic Thinking workshop. Now he is with the American Legislative Exchange. They work to network pro-market state legislators. Here Jonathan is with Medicaid expansion video. 
4, Maxford Nelson, former Seattle debater. I earlier read Max's work on resisting state mandates to push homecare workers (federally funded) to join labor union. I don't know the latest on this. But for all federal and state funded or assisted health care, there is push to unionize everyone as condition of state or federal funds. Here are other Freedom Fd. health care posts
5. Andrew Trask, Deep Mind and Openmined. Andrew was a homeschool debater in Memphis and I was in touch with him for the AI topic. He has videos and articles on his privacy preserving AI for health care. Most medical records are protected by federal regulations so can't be shared without security. But that limit research that could discover possible causes for illnesses.


